The Analysis of Cloud Computing Service Level Agreement 
(SLA) to Support Cloud Service Consumers with the SLA 
Creation Process 
 
 
 
 
by 
 
 Hebatalla TERFAS  
 
 
 
 
THESIS PRESENTED TO ÉCOLE DE TECHNOLOGIE SUPÉRIEURE 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT FOR A MASTER’S DEGREE 
WITH THESIS IN SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 
M.A.Sc. 
 
 
 
 
MONTREAL, MARCH 1st, 2019 
 
 
 
 
ÉCOLE DE TECHNOLOGIE SUPÉRIEURE 
UNIVERSITÉ DU QUÉBEC 
 
 
 
 
 Hebatalla Terfas, 2018 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Creative Commons license allows readers to download this work and share it with others as long as the 
author is credited. The content of this work can’t be modified in any way or used commercially. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BOARD OF EXAMINERS  
 
THIS THESIS HAS BEEN EVALUATED 
 
BY THE FOLLOWING BOARD OF EXAMINERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Witold Suryn, Thesis Director 
Software Engineering & Information Technology Department 
École de technologie supérieure 
 
 
Mr. Eric Paquette, President of the Board of Examiners 
Software Engineering & Information Technology Department 
École de technologie supérieure 
 
 
Mr. François Coallier, Member of the jury 
Software Engineering & Information Technology Department 
École de technologie supérieure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS THESIS WAS PRENSENTED AND DEFENDED 
 
IN THE PRESENCE OF A BOARD OF EXAMINERS AND PUBLIC 
 
JANUARY 29TH 2019 
 
AT ÉCOLE DE TECHNOLOGIE SUPÉRIEURE 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
 
At the beginning, I would like to thank my creator “Allah” who gave me the strength to go 
through this path and helped me to achieve my goals and dreams. 
 
I would like to express my deep appreciation to my research supervisor, Prof. Witold Suryn. I 
am very thankful for the opportunity he gave me to work on this research and for his great 
support and guidance through all the stages of this research.  
 
I also would like to thank my colleagues Jonathan Roy and Sara Moazzezi Eftekhar for their 
outstanding support and advices. 
 
Very special thanks to my family, my father who believed in me and supported me in every 
step I took. For my mother who always encouraged me to be the best and do my best to reach 
my goals, my brothers for their endless support and kindness.     
 
Extraordinary thanks as well to my husband and my children Jude and Zinedine who stayed 
by my side and supported me proudly through this journey. I am very grateful for the 
strength and happiness they gave me. I dedicate this thesis to them as a proof of my love and 
appreciation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Les analyses du niveau de service sur l’infonuagique (Cloud computing) pour aider les 
utilisateurs de services l’infonuagique au processus de création de Contrat de niveau de 
service 
 
Hebatalla TERFAS   
 
RÉSUMÉ 
 
Le l’infonuagique s'est développé rapidement ces dernières années. Les parties prenantes et 
plusieurs utilisateurs ont commencé à migrer leurs données vers le l’infonuagique pour tirer 
parti de son utilisation et de son stockage. La première chose que le fournisseur de services 
l’infonuagique(CSP) et les clients du service cloud (CSC) doivent traiter est l’accord de 
niveau de service (SLA). Il s’agit d’un accord conclu entre le fournisseur de service cloud et 
le client du service cloud, contenant les exigences du consommateur et le niveau de service 
fourni par le fournisseur de services cloud. Le processus de création d'un contrat de niveau de 
service est essentiel pour les fournisseurs de service de l’infonuagique et les consommateurs. 
Cependant, cela pourrait être vague et pas bien défini. Pour améliorer l'utilisation de tous les 
services de l’infonuagique, le contenu et la création de l'accord de niveau de service doivent 
être gérés de manière efficace et prudente. 
 
Dans cette thèse, nous avons d’abord effectué une revue de littérature pour vérifier le niveau 
d’occurrence des paramètres SLA et l’objectif de niveau de service SLO dans le monde 
universitaire et générer une liste des paramètres SLA et SLO les plus et les moins étudiés. 
Dans le deuxième chapitre, nous avons confronté cette liste aux trois fournisseurs de services 
de l’infonuagique les plus populaires du marché moderne (Amazon, Microsoft et Google) 
afin d’enquêter sur la couverture de leur contrat de niveau de service. 
 
Enfin, dans le dernier chapitre, nous avons proposé un outil SLA qui pourrait aider les 
fournisseurs de service cloud et les consommateurs dans le processus de création de SLA. 
Cet outil SLA aiderait les consommateurs tout au long de la phase de négociation et 
faciliterait le processus de selection, afin de choisir le fournisseur de service le plus adapté. 
 
 
 
Mots-clés: L’infonuagique, Contrat de niveau de service (SLA), Objectif de niveau de  
service (SLO), Cycle de vie du SLA, Phase de négociation du SLA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
The Analysis of Cloud Computing Service Level Agreement (SLA) to Support Cloud 
Service Consumers with the SLA Creation Process  
 
Hebatalla TERFAS 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Cloud computing has been developing rapidly in the past few years. Stakeholders and several 
users started to migrate their data to the cloud to benefit from its usage and storage. The first 
step cloud service provider (CSP) and cloud service consumers (CSC) deal with is the service 
level agreement (SLA). It is an agreement issued between the cloud service provider and the 
cloud service customer that contains the consumer’s service requirements and the service 
level provided by cloud service providers. The process to create an SLA agreement is very 
essential for both cloud service providers and consumers. However, it could be vague and not 
well defined. To enhance the usage of any cloud services, the content and the creation of the 
SLA agreement should be handled efficiently and carefully.   
 
In this thesis, first we conducted a literature review to check the level of occurrence of SLA 
and SLO parameters in the academia and generate a list of the most and least studied SLA 
and SLO parameters. In the second chapter, we confronted this list to the three most popular 
cloud service providers in the modern market (Amazon, Microsoft and Google) to investigate 
their SLA agreement coverage. 
 
Finally, in the last chapter, we proposed an SLA toolkit that could assist cloud service 
providers and consumers in the process of SLA creation. This SLA toolkit would help the 
consumers through the negation phase and facilitate the selection process to choose the most 
applicable cloud service providers’ offer. 
 
 
 
Keywords: Cloud computing, Service level agreement (SLA), Service level objective (SLO),    
SLA life cycle, SLA Negotiation phase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Page 
INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................1 
CHAPTER1 LITERATURE REVIEW…………………………...…………..….…………..3 
1.1 
SLA parameters distribution ..........................................................................................3 
1.1.1 
Extracted SLA parameters .......................................................................... 3 
1.1.2 
Literature review methodology ................................................................... 6 
1.2 
SLO parameters distribution ........................................................................................16 
1.2.1 
Extracted SLO parameters ........................................................................ 16 
CHAPTER 2         CONFRONTING CLOUD SLA AND SLO PARAMETERS’ LISTS WITH 
MOST POPULAR CLOUD SERVICE PROVIDERS IN THE MODREN 
MARKET…………………………………………………………….......25 
2.1 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................25 
2.2 
Cloud computing providers’ SLA offers .....................................................................27 
2.2.1 
Amazon ..................................................................................................... 27 
2.2.1.1 Amazon S3 SLA ........................................................................ 28 
2.2.1.2 AWS customer agreement ......................................................... 29 
2.2.1.3 AWS service terms .................................................................... 29 
2.2.2 
Microsoft ................................................................................................... 30 
2.2.2.1 SLA for storage .......................................................................... 31 
2.2.2.2 Microsoft Azure agreement ....................................................... 33 
2.2.3 
Google ....................................................................................................... 34 
2.2.3.1 Google cloud storage SLA ......................................................... 34 
2.2.3.2 Google cloud platform terms of service ..................................... 35 
2.2.3.3 Google service specific terms .................................................... 38 
2.3 
The comparison between the extracted SLA and SLO lists and modren cloud 
providers SLA offers....................................................................................................39 
2.3.1 
Modern cloud providers SLA offers and the extracted SLA parameters’ 
list .............................................................................................................. 39 
2.3.1.1 The criteria used in the comparison between cloud service 
providers’ SLA offers and the extracted SLA parameters.. ....... 39 
2.3.2 
Modern cloud providers’ SLA offers and the extracted SLO parameters’ 
list .............................................................................................................. 42 
2.3.2.1 The criteria used in the comparison between cloud service 
providers’ SLA offers and the extracted SLO parameters. ........ 42 
2.4 
Observations and conclusion .......................................................................................45 
CHAPTER 3        PROPOSED SLA TOOLKIT………………………………………….…49 
3.1 
Cloud computing SLA life cycle .................................................................................49 
3.2 
SLA toolkit...................................................................................................................50 
3.2.1 
How Does it work ..................................................................................... 51 
3.3 
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................55 

CONCLUSION……................................................................................................................57 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS.........................................................................................................59 
 
ANNEX I    SLA AND SLO PARAMETERS EXTRACTION.............................................61 
 
ANNEX II   SLA AND SLO OCCURANCES PERCENTAGES..........................................87 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY..................................................................................................................103 
 
XII 

 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
Page 
Table 2.1  
Microsoft Storage Extracted SLA Parameters ...........................................32 
Table 2.2  
Google Cloud Platform Term Extracted SLA parameters .........................35 
Table 2.3  
The Comparison of Most Studied SLA Parameters and Cloud Providers .39 
Table 2.4  
The Comparison of Most Studied SLO Parameters and Cloud Providers .43 
 
 

 
 

 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
Page 
Figure 1.1 
SLA Parameter Extraction Process ..............................................................7 
Figure 1.2  
SLA Parameters Distributions Chart ...........................................................9 
Figure 1.3  
SLA Parameters’ Distribution Part1 ..........................................................11 
Figure 1.4  
SLA Parameters’ Distribution Part 2 .........................................................14 
Figure 1.5  
SLO Parameters Distribution Chart ...........................................................17 
Figure 1.6  
SLO Parameters’ Distribution Part 1 .........................................................19 
Figure 1.7  
SLO Parameters’ Distribution Part 2 .........................................................22 
 
Figure 3.1 
 Classic SLA management Life Cycle …. .................................................49 
Figure 3.2  
SLA Parameters Identification Form .........................................................52 
Figure 3.3  
SLA Toolkit Work Process ........................................................................53 
 

 
 

 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
AWS         Amazon Web Service 
 
 
CC            Cloud Computing 
 
 
CSC          Cloud Service Consumer 
 
 
CSP           Cloud Service Provider 
 
 
IaaS           Infrastructure as a service 
 
 
KPIs          Key performance Indicators  
 
 
PAYG       Pay As you Go Cloud computing  
 
 
PaaS          Platform as a service 
 
 
QoS           Quality of Service 
 
 
QRs           Quality Requirements 
 
 
RTO          Recovery Time Objective 
 
 
SLA          Service Level Agreement  
 
 
SLO          Service Level Objective 
 
 
SL             Service level  
 
 
SaaS          Software as a service 
 
 
 
S3              Amazon Simple Storage Service 
 
 
 
 


 
INTRODUCTION 
  
Considering the several advantages cloud computing is providing for users such as reduction 
in cost and elastic resources, etc., it is rapidly taking over traditional IT infrastructure and 
many business stockholders, government and academia nowadays are transforming and 
uploading their work to the cloud.  It is a wide field that researchers keep working on to 
improve the level of quality provided.  
 
The first step cloud service consumers face when subscribing to a cloud service is Service 
level agreement (SLA). It is a contract issued between cloud service provider and consumer 
that should specify the service level requested by cloud service consumers and identifies their 
requirements (Terfas, Suryn, Roy & Moazzezi Eftekhar, 2018, P.2). Having a well-structured 
SLA could lead to a better service level and less service violations. However, “One open 
problem is that service level agreements (SLAs) in the cloud ecosystem are yet to mature to a 
state where critical applications can be reliably deployed in clouds” (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 
2015, P.1). Therefore, several researches are conducted to improve the SLA structure and 
facilitate the creation process. Although many researchers tried to simplify the use and the 
initiation of an SLA, they didn’t focus enough on SLA and SLO parameters, which could 
lead us to a poor SLA agreement that contains only useless and impractical words. According 
to Faniyi, most of the studied papers in their research discussed only one to three SLA 
parameters rather than the rest of cloud service parameters (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.2). In 
this research, we deeply analysed several papers from the literature to find out the most and 
least studied SLA and SLO parameters that cloud service consumers would use during the 
SLA creation.  
 
 Another unsolved problem is that cloud service providers define SLA and SLO parameters 
in advance so they don’t respect all users’ requirements (Rady, 2012, P.9). Consequently, we 
deeply investigate three well-known cloud service providers (Amazon, Microsoft and 
Google) and confront their SLA agreements to the SLA and SLO list extracted from the 
academia to check the level of coverage they offer in their SLA. 
 

2 
SLA life cycle consists of several stages that start with the negotiation stage. At this stage, 
cloud service consumers have to choose the most appropriate cloud service provider that 
adheres to their requested requirements. However, SLA creation process and cloud provider 
selection could be complicated, difficult to follow and time consuming. In this research we 
proposed an SLA toolkit that could help both cloud service provider and consumer. This 
SLA toolkit could facilitate the negation process and help the consumer in the process of 
cloud provider’s selection. In addition, it could help cloud service consumers gain more 
controllability over their data to increase the level of trust towards cloud computing 
environments.  
 
Thesis structure 
This thesis is structured as the following: the first chapter presents a literature review 
conducted to show the SLA and SLO parameters distributions in the academia and to identify 
the most and least studied SLA and SLO parameters. Chapter two illustrates the selected 
cloud service providers and confronted them to the extracted SLA and SLO parameters’ lists 
to show the coverage percentage for each cloud service provider. Chapter three presents the 
proposed SLA toolkit and how it works to assist cloud service providers and consumers 
thorough the process to create an SLA agreement. Finally, we conclude our thesis and 
present our future research plan.  
 
 

 
CHAPITRE 1 
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this chapter, we present a list of SLA and SLO parameters that were extracted from ISO 
standards 19086 and the literature. We demonstrate the occurrence percentages for all the 
presented SLA and SLO parameters to identify the most and the least studied SLA and SLO 
parameters in the academia. 
 
1.1 
SLA parameters distribution 
1.1.1 
Extracted SLA parameters  
“Service level agreement (SLA) is a contract signed between the customer and the service 
provider. It states the terms of the service including the non-functional requirements of the 
service specified as the quality of service (QoS), obligations, service pricing, and penalties in 
case of agreement violations” (Emeakaroha, Brandic, Maurer & Dustdar, 2010, P.1). From a 
quality point of view, SLA consists of several agreements, which are combined into one 
contract. These agreements are based on different facts such as nature, cost and objectives of 
the provided service. Additionally, it can contain the number of violations that are allowed 
during a predefined period of time. (Mirobi & Arockiam, 2015, P.3). 
 
Nowadays, several factors are encouraging stakeholders to migrate their data to the cloud. 
However, there are many unsolved issues which could slow down the process. One of the 
issues that cloud service consumers face when they plan to move to the cloud is that cloud 
computing service level agreement (SLAs) are not reliable enough to support the deployment 
of their crucial applications (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.1), Although, International 
Organization for standardization (ISO) has developed ISO/IEC19086 cloud computing 
Service level agreement (SLA) framework, only ISO/IEC 19086 part 1 and 3 are published 
while ISO/IEC19086 part 2 and 4 are still under development.  

4 
Also ISO/IEC 20000 series was developed to support IT service management. It identifies 
different requirements to support service management systems SMS. It consists of 11 parts. 
ISO/IEC 20000-9 focuses on cloud services and provides a guideline to facilitate the usage of 
ISO/IEC 20000-1 for cloud services by proposing some scenarios that can help both cloud 
service providers and consumers. However, service level agreement was only mentioned as a 
tool to ensure the quality of the service and did not include any SLA or SLO parameters that 
could be useful in the SLA creation process. Regarding service level agreement SLA, 
ISO/IEC 20000 defines SLA as a document that includes service requirements and service 
targets. According to ISO/IEC 20000, one or more service level agreements SLAs could be 
created for each IT service. In addition, SLAs should be updated according to any 
requirements change. According to Zitek, “ISO/IEC 20000 defines SLA as a mandatory 
requirement as one of the service delivery process” (20000Academy, 2015). ISO/IEC20000 
specified some recommendations and conditions which could apply for service management 
systems SMS process that includes some SLA contents and conditions which could be 
considered in an SLA contract. However, no SLA or SLO parameters were suggested or 
proposed. Therefore, it was not considered in this analysis due to the shortage use and 
consideration of SLA and SLO parameters. 
 
Meanwhile, information technology infrastructure library ITIL consists of best practices 
collection that could be used for IT service managements. It can help organizations by 
improving the delivery of IT services. Service level agreement SLA were discussed in ITIL, 
only in two core areas service design and continual service improvement to cover any service 
updates that can affect the SLA. Based on Zitek, ITIL defines SLA in the scope of the service 
level management process and specifies other types of agreements that could be used besides 
SLAs such as operational level agreement (OLA) and underpinning contract (UC) 
(20000Academy, 2015). In addition, it provides guidance that could help providers and 
consumers in the initiation process of an SLA. For example, the responsibilities of providers 
and consumers should be well defined in an SLA contract. Also a single SLA could be used 
by various consumers for several IT services (Morin, Aubert& Gateau, 2012, P.4). ITIL 
assists organizations to know the value of their IT services to help understanding the 

 
importance of this value to define a better SLA. However, ITIL is not totally focusing on 
obtaining this (Wegmann, Regev, Garret &Maréchal, 2008, P.1). Therefore, ITIL do not 
provide any SLA or SLO parameters to help in the definition of an SLA. Even though ITIL 
provided several recommendations regarding the SLA creation, it did not include any SLA 
and SLO parameters that could be helpful to use in an SLA and in this research analysis.  
 
Cloud computing SLA is still suffering from an obvious lack of standardization. In spite of 
the fact that there are a wide variety of papers on SLA in the academia, only few of them 
discuss SLA parameters. As shown by Faniyi & Bahsoon in their systematic survey, they 
demonstrated that only one to three SLA parameters were mentioned in the greater part of the 
analysed articles, while only a few articles considered four to five SLA parameters (Faniyi & 
Bahsoon, 2015, P.7). 
 
We conducted a literature review to extract the most studied SLA parameters in the academia 
and create a list of the most frequently mentioned SLA parameters. This list would help 
analysing and verifying the applicability of SLA contracts for (Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft) in the modern market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
1.1.2 
Literature review methodology 
In this research, we used several research engines such as Compendex, IEEE Xplore and 
Google Scholar to look for articles concerning this topic. By using multiple related keywords 
and some questions, related articles were found and analysed. Some keywords that were used 
are cloud computing Service level agreement SLA, quality aspects, SLA parameters, SLA 
challenges, SLA initiation and SLA Frameworks.  
 
The following research questions were investigated: 
 
Q1: What are the SLA parameters that should be covered in cloud computing SLAs?  
Q2: What is Service Level Agreement?  
Q3: What is the state of cloud computing SLAs today?  
 
To answer the above mentioned questions, we conducted a literature review and the most 
relevant articles were investigated. However, only the applicable ones were selected. At the 
beginning of this research, 40 articles were found in this area. By carefully scanning the 
abstracts, only 25 were selected and finally after reading all of these articles individually, 
only 19 included the required information for this research analysis. Many of the considered 
papers proposed SLA frameworks.  SLA and SLO elements were discussed and used to 
prove the applicability of their frameworks, while other articles discuss only SLA definition 
and its importance in the industry. Due to the limited research papers on this area (SLA) a lot 
of the chosen papers were conference papers. Articles take longer time to be published. 
Furthermore, conference papers are more up to date. 
 

 
 
Figure 1.1 SLA Parameter Extraction Process 
 
As shown in figure 1.1 stage 3, these are the variables definitions: 
 
 
 
 
 
As seen in Figure 1.1 SLA parameters extraction process consists of 4 steps: 
 
Step.1: The literature review was conducted; SLA parameters were extracted from several 
articles that were found in the academia. 
 
Step.2: A table for each article was created. It includes SLA and SLO parameters that were 
found in each reference. 
 
• 
Let (F) be the percentage of the frequency of SLA parameters. 
• 
Let M(n) be the number of how many times each parameter was mentioned across all the 
articles.(when the parameter is mentioned one time or more in each article, it is considered as 1)  
• 
Let A(n) be the total number of the analysed articles.  
• 
(n): means the total number. For example, A(n) is the total number of the analysed articles 
 

8 
Step.3: After the duplicated parameters were eliminated, the next step was to check the 
occurrences for each SLA parameter in all the provided references. For further details, please 
refer to the tables in Appendix I and II. As shown in appendix I and II, M (Mentioned) was 
chosen when the SLA parameter was mentioned while NM (Not Mentioned) was chosen 
when the parameter was not mentioned in the reference. 
 
Step.4: After applying the above mentioned steps to all extracted SLA parameters, the 
occurrence percentage was calculated using the following equation: 
 
F  = M(n) X 100 
 
Where F is the distribution percentage of the SLA parameter in the academia, a percentage 
for each SLA parameter was identified. Based on this, the list of the most frequently used 
SLA parameters in the academia was created. In addition, a chart was drawn to show the 
highest and the lowest percentage of the parameters and to clarify the distribution for the rest 
of the SLA parameters.  
 
NOTE: This methodology was also used to create the list of the extracted SLO parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A(n) 

 
The following chart (figure 1.2) shows the most studied and least studied SLA parameters 
found in the academia 
 
 
Figure 1.2 SLA Parameters Distributions Chart 
 
After classifying the extracted SLA parameters and identifying the percentage of their 
distribution, we have indicated that these SLA parameters which are presented in figure 1.2 
were found in the literature and used or defined by a variety of researchers. After extracting 
SLA parameters from the literature, we calculated their occurrence percentages as shown 
previously to find out the frequency percentage for each parameter and how many times it 

10 
was mentioned. Based on this, the criteria used to identify the most and least used SLA 
parameters was that parameters with the highest percentages were considered as the most 
studied SLA parameters in the literature while parameters with the lowest percentages were 
considered as the least studied SLA parameters. Overall, the bar graph illustrates the 
percentage of occurrence for the SLA parameters according to their distributions in the 
academia. 
 
The chart consists of 41 SLA parameters. The highest occurrence percentage is 68% and the 
lowest is 5%. Looking in closer detail at the chart it can be seen that availability and security 
are on the top of the graph. They were the most studied SLA parameters in the academia and 
have the highest percentage among all other extracted parameters, while response time and 
performance came right after them with a percentage of 57% and 52% respectively. 
 
 On the other hand, some SLA parameters such as (Service Excess Use, Data deletion, 
Agility and Error rate) have the lowest occurrence percentage. Therefore, they are considered 
as the least studied SLA parameters.  
 
This list of SLA parameters support cloud service consumers and providers with the most 
prominent SLA parameters to be analysed and discussed when creating a user-tailored SLA 
for cloud service consumers. In addition, in the modern market, providing cloud service 
consumers with longer list of parameters would help to persuade cloud service consumers 
and encourage them to move to the cloud (Suryn, 2013, P.152). 
 
To simplify this analysis and explanation, we divided the chart in figure 1.2 into two charts 
and illustrated them individually. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 1.3 SLA Parameters’ Distribution Part1 
 
As shown in figure.1.3, the bar graph shows the SLA parameters that were derived from 
several articles in the academia such as (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015), (San & Irena, 2016) & 
(Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012), etc., where they were mentioned as critical SLA parameters to cloud 
service consumers. By closely observing the graph, it can be seen that availability and 
security are mentioned frequently often, when comparing them to other the SLA parameters 
in the reviewed papers, while service violation, storage and role and responsibility got less 
consideration and were at the bottom of the chart.    
 
 In following paragraphs the definitions of some extracted SLA parameters are presented, 
addressing the sources, where they were discussed and derived from.  The upcoming SLA 
parameters were selected based on their order and percentage in the chart in figure 1.3. We 
illustrated the SLA parameters with different percentages to show the variety among these 
presented percentages.   
 

12 
SLA parameter 1 (Availability). According to ISO/IEC 17788 cloud computing standard 
“Availability is the property of being accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized 
entity”. This SLA parameter clarifies to the user that the requested service is easy to access 
and usable in a certain period of time. A new SLA framework for E-commerce cloud service 
with respect to the end user perspectives was proposed by (Busalim, Hussin & Ibrahim, 
2013, P.1). They provided a list of the most applicable SLA parameters and their objectives. 
Availability was on the top of this list. “Most of cloud service provider’s focus only on small 
set of parameters, namely availability, request completion rate and response time”. (Busalim 
et al., 2013, P.3). In accordance with Frey, to encourage cloud service consumers to move 
their data to the cloud, an individual SLA agreement should be build according to the 
requirements of each requested service rather than having a standard SLA for all cloud 
service consumers neglecting their different needs (Frey, Luthje, Teckelmann& Reich,2013, 
P.1). They illustrated a machine processed Adaptable Service Level Objective Agreement 
(A-SLO-A). They also suggested that Availability is one of the critical SLA parameters to be 
included when creating an SLA agreement to suit the requirements of different cloud service 
consumers. 
 
SLA parameter 2 (Security). Security is another issue that cloud service consumers and 
providers have to deal with. It is a vital SLA parameter that is recommended to be considered 
when creating an SLA contract. ISO/IEC 19086 part 4 discusses security and privacy in 
cloud computing. As indicated by (Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012, P.3 ), to assure the security of data 
transitions from and to the cloud, SLAs should consider security as a crucial element. 
Considering the difficulties cloud service consumers face when choosing the appropriate 
cloud service provider, (San & Irena, 2016, P.12) precisely explained the most important 
elements to be considered in an SLA and Security parameters were mentioned. 
  
SLA parameter 3 (Service assurance and guarantee).  Based on Garg, “Assurance indicates 
the likelihood of a Cloud service that it will perform as expected or promised in the SLA.” 
(Garg, Versteeg & Buyya, 2011, P.2). Therefore, stakeholders consider it as an important 
element when they move their data to the cloud. According to Ghosh, even though the 

 
majority of cloud service providers are focusing on availability rather than other parameters, 
cloud service consumers still demand more assurance and guarantees to the provided service 
(Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012, P.1). Therefore, it is specified as an important parameter to discuss 
when creating cloud computing SLA contract.  
 
SLA parameter 4 (SLA violation). SLA violation is one of the challenges that could affect 
cloud service providers and consumers. It is the possibility of job failures or not meeting the 
service levels required by cloud service consumer (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.4).  A survey 
was conducted by (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.5) to improve the structure of cloud SLAs and 
their management. One of the studied SLA violation parameters is allowable violations, 
which defines the allowed number of violation permitted. (Chana & Singh, 2014, P.4) 
discussed the relationship between quality of service QoS and cloud computing SLAs. 
Moreover, they presented the elements each SLA should consist. Service violation was one 
of the components that were suggested to be included.   
 
SLA parameter 5 (Cost and finance). Since cloud computing is considered as a cost 
effective service in contrast to the traditional computing, cost is one of the most crucial 
elements that affects cloud service consumers decision to migrate to the cloud (El-Awadi 
&Abu-Rizka, 2015, P.2).  Therefore, it is a prominent feature that encourages stakeholders to 
migrate to the cloud. Based on El-Awadi, finance is one of the parameters that need to be 
discussed when creating and negotiating the SLA contract (El-Awadi &Abu-Rizka, 2015, 
P.3). Cost was identified as one of the parameters included in the top level QoS groups by 
(Garg et al., 2011, P.2). Thus, “Cost is clearly one of the vital attributes for IT and the 
business”.  According to the systematic analysis conducted by (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, 
P.7), cost was one of the most studied SLA parameters and used especially in the platform as 
a service (PaaS). 
 
 

14 
 
Figure 1.4 SLA Parameters’ Distribution Part 2 
 
As shown in figure.1.4, the bar chart presents the rest of the extracted SLA parameters 
derived from several articles in the academia such as (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015), (San & 
Irena, 2016) & (Emeakaroha et al., 2010, P.6), etc. Data deletion, agility, service excess use 
and error rate has the lowest occurrence percentage of 5%. Most of these SLA parameters 
showed in the graph were mentioned once or twice in the analysed articles. In addition, some 
of them such as bandwidth and error rate were mentioned as SLA parameters in some papers 
and as SLO parameters in others.  
 
In following paragraphs the definitions of some extracted SLA parameters are presented, 
addressing the sources, where they were discussed and derived from.  The approaching SLA 
parameters were chosen based on their percentage and position in the chart in figure 1.4. We 
demonstrated the SLA parameters with different percentages to show the variety among these 
presented percentages. 
 
 

 
SLA parameter 1 (Bandwidth). Based on Faniyi, bandwidth was one of the most studied 
SLA parameters in the survey they conducted (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.7). However, in 
this research, we found that bandwidth was mentioned as an SLA parameter in some papers 
and in a few articles as an SLO parameter. Moreover, based on Emeakaroha, bandwidth was 
divided into incoming bandwidth and outgoing bandwidth (Emeakaroha et al., 2010, P.6). 
 
SLA parameter 2 (Service renewal).  Cloud computing offers many features for users such 
as pay as you go (PAYG cloud computing), which means cloud service users can pay only 
when they use the service. However, some SLA contracts include a starting and an ending 
date (San & Irena, 2016, P.7). According to San & Irena, service renewal is one of the crucial 
SLA parameters, which helps to identify how consumers could renew their service, and 
clarifies any available renewal conditions. 
 
SLA parameter 3 (Service credit). When any SLA violations occur or any service 
guarantees are not met, cloud service providers should compensate cloud service consumers 
with Service credit. Some companies nowadays such as Amazon and Google offer service 
credit as money refund or additional service applied to the user’s usage in the future. Based 
on San & Irena, Service credit is an obvious element when discussing SLA agreements (San 
& Irena et al., 2016, P.6).  
 
SLA parameter 4 (Data deletion). According to ISO/IEC19086 part-1, “Data deletion is the 
removal of access to cloud service customer data through the user and administrator 
capabilities of the cloud service”. In this research, data deletion was one of the least studied 
SLA parameters in the literature with a 5%.  When any failures occur in the cloud service an 
automatic action is taken and replicates the data directly to save it in multiple servers. 
Therefore, when terminating the service there is an issue to secure the deletion of all stored 
data and that is why ISO/IEC 19086-1 mentioned data deletion as an SLA parameter to 
consider in cloud SLAs.  
 

16 
SLA parameter 5 (Error rate). Error rate was also one of the least studied SLA parameters, 
as it was mentioned only in one article. Based on Ghosh, Error rate is one of the important 
SLA parameters that should be considered when creating an SLA agreement for storage as a 
service cloud (Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012, P.3 ).   
 
SLA parameter 6 (Service excess use). While cloud computing offers pay as you use 
features, cloud service consumers can also initiate a contract where they can set and indicate 
the amount of usage with the cloud service provider. Consequently, the user needs to know 
the usage and check for any access use. 
  
Overall, looking into the aforementioned information, some SLA parameters found in the 
academia were well defined and precisely explained, while others were defined differently 
from an article to another. Besides, part of the analysed papers mentioned some SLA 
parameters as SLO parameters, which indicated the lack of standardization. Although authors 
in several articles demonstrated in details the definitions of SLA agreements and their 
importance to cloud service providers and consumers, there was no clear method or 
recommendations on how to evaluate SLA agreements using these SLA parameters or how 
cloud service consumers could measure SLA parameters to assess the provided service.  
 
For further information refer to appendix I and appendix II. 
 
1.2 
SLO parameters distribution 
1.2.1 
Extracted SLO parameters 
According to Frey,  “Service Level Objectives (SLOs) are a central element of every service 
level agreements (SLA), which include the negotiated service qualities (service level) and the 
corresponding Key Performance Indicators” (Frey et al,2013, P.3). They are the metrics or 
measures that could be used to check and evaluate all SLA parameters.  
 

 
The following chart (figure 1.5) shows the Most studied and least studied SLO parameters 
found in the academia. 
 
 
Figure 1.5 SLO Parameters Distribution Chart 

18 
The bar chart presented in figure 1.5 demonstrates the percentage of occurrences for the 
Service level objectives (SLO) in cloud computing based on their distribution in the 
academia. After extracting SLO parameters from the literature, we calculated their 
occurrence percentage as shown previously for SLA parameters to find out the frequency 
percentage for each parameter and how many times it was mentioned. Based on this, 
parameter with the highest percentages were considered as the most studied SLA parameters 
in the literature while parameters with the lowest percentages were considered as the least 
studied SLA parameters. Looking in closer detail at the chart, it can be observed that most of 
the SLO parameters calculated percentage was 5% to 10 % which shows an obvious poor 
occurrence for SLO parameters in the academia.  
 
The graph consists of 48 SLO parameters. Response time was on the top of the list with 36%, 
while throughput and availability came second with 26% each.  The rest of the SLO 
parameters were ranked between 15% and 5%.   
 
On the other hand, some SLO parameters were also mentioned in the literature as SLA 
parameters too, such as response time, availability, portability and reliability. Consequently, 
in this research we faced several limitations regarding cloud computing SLO parameters.  
 
Overall, it can be clearly seen that there is a lack of connection between SLA and SLO 
parameters in the academia. While SLA parameters were mentioned in some academic 
articles, there is a scarcity of information regarding the definitions and the usages of SLO 
parameters.  
 
To clarify this analysis, we divide the chart in figure 1.5 into two charts and demonstrate 
them individually. 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 1.6 SLO Parameters’ Distribution Part 1 
 
As shown in figure 1.6, the bar chart presents the extracted SLO parameters according to the 
literature. Response time, availability and throughput got the highest occurrence percentage 
among all other SLO parameters. In addition, as seen in figure 1.5 and based on the 
conducted literature review, there is a tremendous gap between cloud SLO parameters and 
their definitions, usage and distributions. It is very obvious that SLO parameters are not well 
defined and poorly mentioned. Moreover, in some cases they were completely ignored. 
 
In following paragraphs the definitions of some extracted SLO parameters are presented, 
addressing the sources, where they were discussed and derived from. The upcoming SLO 
parameters were chosen based on their percentage and order in the chart in figure 1.6. We 
demonstrated the SLO parameters with different percentages to show the variety among these 
presented percentages.  
  

20 
SLO parameter 1 (Response time). According to Busalim, response time was classified as 
an SLO parameter for cloud performance. It is a certain period of time when a service request 
is sent and a response is received by the user (Busalim et al., 2013, P.4).  Although response 
time was mentioned as an SLA parameter in several articles, it was considered as an SLO 
parameter in others. A new SLA framework for monitoring and checking SLOs by using a 
third party was proposed by (Ghosh, Ghosh & Das, 2015, P.4). They considered response 
time as an SLO parameter example, while they mentioned it as an SLA parameter too.  
 
SLO parameter 2 (Throughput). It is the number of inquiry that the service can deal with in 
a specific period of time (Busalim et al., 2013, P.4). Throughput was considered as an SLO 
parameter for performance in several articles such as (ISO SLA standard 19086-1) and 
(Busalim et al., 2013. P.4). Based on Frey, throughput was also specified as one of the SLO 
parameters that could be used in cloud computing (Frey et al., 2013, P.4). 
 
SLO parameter 3 (Uptime and Downtime). According to ISO19086-1, uptime and 
downtime are considered as SLO parameters to check and evaluate the availability of the 
service. Actually they refer to the time when the service is accessible or not and it is usually 
calculated over a certain period of time.  
 
SLO parameter 1 (Data encryption). It is a mechanism that helps to control and check 
whether the sent information or the data which is stored in the cloud storage is encrypted or 
not. In addition, it checks the percentage of encrypted data which is stored in cloud 
infrastructure (Rios, Mallouli, Rak, Casola & Ortiz, 2016, P.6). 
 
SLO parameter 4 (Recovery Time objective RTO). Based on Ghosh, “Recovery Time 
objective (RTO) is the period of time allowed for recovery” (Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012, P.4). 
Moreover, it was also mentioned in ISO/IEC 19086-1 as a part of the cloud service provider 
disaster recovery plan. According to ISO/IEC 19086-1, when cloud service provider 
announces a disaster and a recovery process is initiated, the recovery time objective period 

 
starts and ends when cloud service consumer can access and work on the secondary 
environment provided.   
 
SLO parameter 2 (Reliability). Based on Garg, reliability means that no service failures 
occur in a predefined period of time (Garg et al., 2011, P.4). Choosing the best and most 
appropriate cloud service provider is a huge challenge all cloud consumers face when they 
decide to move their data to the cloud. A framework that allows cloud consumers to evaluate 
several cloud providers’ offers was proposed by (El-Awadi &Abu-Rizka, 2015, P.3). They 
indicated that reliability is a key performance indicator (KPI) for assurance.   
 
SLO parameter 3 (Packet loss). Packet loss was defined and considered as one of the SLO 
parameters that could be used in an SLA. It is the number of lost packets during all the 
transmissions (Frey et al., 2013, P.4).  
 
 

22 
 
Figure 1.7 SLO Parameters’ Distribution Part 2 
 
As presented in figure 1.7, the bar graph illustrates the occurrence percentage of the rest of 
the SLO parameters’ list. By observing the chart, it can be seen that all of the SLO 
parameters shown in this chart are the least studied SLO parameters in the literature. In 
addition, all of them have the lowest occurrence percentage, which is 5%. This means that it 
was mentioned only in one article from the literature.  In general, the poor occurrence for the 
SLO in the literature showed several gaps concerning the SLOs definition and their 
connection to SLA parameters.  
 
In following paragraphs the definitions of some extracted SLO parameters are presented, 
addressing the sources, where they were discussed and derived from. The upcoming SLO 
parameters were chosen based on their position and percentage in the chart in figure 1.7.  
 
 

 
SLO parameter 1 (Dollars, electricity price). Based on Faniyi, Dollar and electricity price 
are some of the SLO parameters assigned to the SLA parameter ‘cost’ (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 
2015, P.6). However, there is no way or method how these SLO parameters can be used to 
measure the cost of the cloud service.  
 
SLO parameter 2 (Elasticity Speed). Based on ISO 19086-part 1, elasticity could be 
measured using two SLO parameters, which are elasticity speed and elasticity precision. 
Elasticity speed is the time that cloud service would take to react to a resource request. There 
are two types of elasticity which are manual and automatic. Therefore, elasticity speed is the 
fastest reaction the service would take under these two scenarios.  
 
Overall, looking into the aforementioned information, there was a huge gap regarding SLA 
and SLO parameters and their usage and definitions. Several investigated articles showed 
different analyses regarding SLA and SLO parameters. Some SLA parameters were 
mentioned as SLO parameters and vice versa. Moreover, some SLA parameters were defined 
differently. Several SLO parameters were not connected to any SLA parameters. This work 
demonstrated many academic articles and showed cloud computing SLA and SLO 
parameters statues in the academia. In addition, it indicated that there is a tremendous lack of 
standardization concerning SLA and SLO parameters. 
 
For more detailed information, refer to appendix I and appendix II. 
 
NOTE: all the above extracted SLA and SLO parameters will be used in the next chapter to 
analyse and prove the applicability of some popular cloud service providers in the modern 
market such as Amazon, Google and Microsoft.  
 
 


 
CHAPITRE 2 
 
 
CONFRONTING CLOUD SLA AND SLO PARAMETERS’S LIST WITH MOST 
POPULAR CLOUD SERVICE PROVIDERs IN THE MODREN MARKET 
In this chapter we will illustrate the selected cloud service providers SLA agreements and 
confront them to the SLA and SLO parameters’ list from the previous chapter to find out the 
coverage percentage for each cloud service provider.  
 
2.1 
Introduction 
Cloud computing has been developing expeditiously over the past few years and impacting 
our lives in so many different ways. It intends to help cloud service users to store and access 
an enormous amount of data and facilitates the usage of many software programs. Several 
companies across industries decide to move their business and their data to the cloud to 
perform efficiently and more economically. A service level agreement (SLA) is the first stage 
cloud service provider and consumer start with. “ Service level agreements (SLA) is a 
contract signed between the customer and the service provider. It states the terms of the 
service including the non-functional requirements of the service specified as the quality of 
service (QoS), obligations, service pricing, and penalties in case of agreement violations” 
(Emeakaroha et al., 2010. P.1). It clarifies the cloud consumers’ requirements and 
demonstrates cloud providers’ offers to assure the level of service expected by cloud service 
clients. 
 
Through the past years, cloud computing has helped and increased the productivity in our 
modern world and provided the users with many advantages that could enhance the usability 
and the development in different life aspects such as health, Information Technology and 
education, etc. Nevertheless, in some scenarios that was not the case. Several cloud breaches 
and incidents have occurred and caused the users a lot of damage, money and data loss. 
According to (Bradford, 2018), in April 2016 the national Elections in Mexico faced a cloud 
breach on the data of the voters. As a consequence of the poor database that was used, most 

26 
of the collected votes were missing or were not protected and became accessible to the 
public. After investigating in the incident, it was concluded that the data was stored illegally 
outside of Mexico in an unreliable Amazon cloud server. If the SLA agreement of this cloud 
service was appropriately negotiated, well reviewed and the SLA parameter data location 
was properly demonstrated and emphasized that the data is confidential and should be stored 
in a certain location, all of this would not happen and the National Electoral Institute would 
have avoided the scandal. Another example that can show the effect of cloud breaches is the 
incident that happened to Anthem, a healthcare insurance company. Based on (Latouf, 2017) 
Anthem experienced a huge data breach that costs the company around 80 million dollar loss. 
The company lost a lot of patients and employees records. After investigating the incidence, 
it was revealed that the breach was due to a cloud-based file sharing service they used. The 
above mentioned examples, show how important is the process of creating an SLA 
agreement and how cloud service providers and consumers should pay more attention and be 
well prepared when they decide to initiate an SLA agreement for a certain service.  
 
Cloud service providers can give the users so many guarantees related to the level of the 
service they provide and attract them with the high availability rates or a quick response time 
rate. But some SLA attributes are neglected and are not discussed enough to protect the users 
from any service violation that might occur in the future. Therefore, SLA agreements should 
cover all aspects of the provided service and support the consumers with the appropriate tools 
or measures to help them gain more controllability on their data.   
 
In reference to the previous chapter, the extracted SLA and SLO lists will be used to check 
the applicability and the coverage of these cloud service providers SLA offers and analysed, 
which parameters from chapter 1 applied to the parameters offered by these providers SLAs. 
The analysis in this research will focus mainly on public cloud offers rather than other cloud 
deployment models, which will be analysed in future research.   
 
 

27 
 
Data is considered as a crucial component in cloud service environments. Therefore, Cloud 
service providers claim that cloud computing could be a helpful solution to protect data 
especially against potential risks associated with hardware. This would persuade stakeholders 
to migrate their data to be stored in cloud. In addition, cloud storage service also has a vital 
role and it is an essential feature of cloud computing, we chose to focus mainly on cloud 
storage products offered by the most popular cloud service providers in the modern market 
such as Amazon Web Service (AWS), Microsoft Azure and Google to investigate their SLAs 
and confront them to the SLA and SLO parameters’ list from the previous chapter.  
 
NOTE: The terms such as parameters, attributes and characteristics are used frequently 
through this document. Since the term (parameter) is used in cloud SLA agreements, it will 
be further employed in this work to simplify the representation in this analysis. 
 
2.2 
Cloud computing providers’ SLA offers 
2.2.1 
Amazon 
Amazon Web Service (AWS) is one of the most popular cloud service providers in the 
modern world. It provides us with several types of cloud storage services such as Amazon 
Elastic Block Store (Amazon EBS), Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) and 
Amazon Glacier, Etc. 
 
Amazon simple storage service (amazon S3) is a web service provided by AWS to facilitate 
the storage and the retrieval of the data stored in cloud. We chose to analyse the SLA of this 
service due to its features and simplicity. As mentioned above, there are many storage 
products Amazon provides. However, Amazon S3 is a simple, flexible storage product that 
any user can use. Hence, it would facilitate and simplify the comparison process with other 
cloud providers.  
 
 

28 
We contacted Amazon customer service through the phone and asked them to provide us 
with their official storage SLA that they give to all customers.  They sent us an email with 
the link to their Amazon S3 Service Level Agreement online. We analysed and reviewed the 
provided SLA document and extracted the SLA parameters that were discussed to show and 
demonstrate the coverage of Amazon S3 SLA Agreement in comparison with the list we 
created in the previous chapter.  
 
In the following paragraphs, the Amazon S3 SLA agreement will be demonstrated and 
analysed. 
 
2.2.1.1 
Amazon S3 SLA 
It was lately updated on April 4, 2018. It starts with a brief explanation of the service and the 
SLA terms including the payment procedures and the SLA exclusions. After analyzing and 
deeply reviewing the document, the used SLA parameters were identified as the following 
SLA contents:  
 
• Error Rate  
• Monthly Uptime Percentage 
• Service Credit 
• (Remedy, unavailability, non-performance) 
• Termination 
• SLA exclusions 
 
In addition, we investigated other Amazon SLAs that are provided online and could be 
related to Amazon S3 SLA such as AWS customer agreement and AWS service terms. After 
analyzing and reviewing the previously mentioned SLAs, we extracted more SLA parameters 
that could be relevant to Amazon S3 SLA agreement and demonstrated them as the 
following. 
 

29 
 
2.2.1.2 
AWS customer agreement 
It is a contract made between Amazon provider and cloud customers. It consists of several 
terms and conditions that could control the usage and the access of any service offered by 
Amazon. Each term has several conditions and cases related to it, which explains different 
situations and the actions that must be taken in case of a service violation. Moreover, it 
shows the responsibilities and limitations for both Amazon provider and service users. This 
SLA was lately updated on July 1, 2018. The used SLA parameters (terms) were identified as 
the following:  
 
• Use of the service  
• Change of service 
• Security and data privacy 
• Consumer’ responsibility 
• Fees and payment  
• Temporary suspension 
• Termination 
• Proprietary rights 
• Identification 
• Disclaimers 
• Limitations of Liability 
• Modification to the agreement 
• Miscellaneous 
• Definition  
 
2.2.1.3 
AWS service terms 
This SLA agreement was lately updated on October 5, 2018. The first part of this agreement 
is universal and applies to all types of Amazon offered services including Amazon S3. 

30 
However, most of the terms speak about the extra fees or responsibilities every user has 
towards using other or additional types of services.  
 
This document mainly contains terms and conditions rather than clear SLA parameters. As 
the first section of this agreement applies to Amazon S3, the rest of the document discusses 
conditions related to other provided services. In the first section, Amazon lists several rules 
to be followed in certain situations. For example, special pricing program, users are allowed 
to receive only one discount per service when Amazon offers multiple discount offers. 
Another term mentioned was about service maintenance, Amazon clarifies that they will 
notify the consumers with any maintenance in advance and users have to cooperate and 
follow any instructions requested by Amazon. Moreover, technical documentation are 
updated from time to time, users have to adhere to the current technical documentation that is 
up to date. 
 
Overall, after reviewing all available SLA documents that could be related to Amazon S3 
service, we found out that Amazon S3 SLA mainly focuses on service availability and 
service credit rather than other SLA parameters.  There are other SLA parameters that are 
mentioned in these SLAs such as security, privacy and response time, etc. However, the main 
focus was mainly on service up time and down time (availability) and service credit and 
pricing. 
 
2.2.2 
Microsoft  
Microsoft Azure is a cloud computing service that provides software as a service (SaaS), 
platform as a service (PaaS) and infrastructure as a service (IaaS). It is launched by Microsoft 
Company and offers several types of services such as virtual machines, Azure database for 
MySQL and storage, etc. It is considered one of the most well-known cloud services that are 
available in the current market.  
 
 

31 
 
Microsoft Azure Storage is a service provided by Microsoft that supports cloud users with a 
scalable and protected storage to upload their data to. We emailed Microsoft Azure customer 
service and asked them to send us their official storage SLA that they give to all customers. 
They called us and we discussed with them about their storage products and asked them to 
provide us with a simple storage product. They suggested Microsoft Azure Storage, so they 
sent us an email with the link to their Microsoft Azure Storage Service Level Agreement 
online. We started looking into the provided SLA document to analyse and extract SLA 
parameters. In the following paragraphs, Microsoft Azure Storage SLA will be demonstrated 
and analysed. 
 
2.2.2.1 
SLA for storage 
It is a contract made between Microsoft provider and customers. It consists of three parts, 
which are introduction, general terms and SLA details. It was updated in December, 2017. At 
the beginning of this document, there are some guarantees Microsoft Azure illustrates to the 
consumers regarding the cool access tire and read/write data from and to different storages. 
Afterwards, it starts with a small introduction linked this SLA to another SLA, which is the 
Microsoft Azure Agreement. It was also mentioned that when service levels are not met as 
mentioned in the SLA, a service credit towards the monthly fees could be issued. Moreover, 
when the service subscription is renewed, the current SLA will be automatically applied to 
the new agreement.   
 
The rest of the SLA document was speaking about general terms and their descriptions, SLA 
details and some SLA limitations.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
Extracted SLA parameters: 
 
Table 2.1 Microsoft Storage Extracted SLA Parameters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We found out that there was another related SLA that is linked to Azure storage SLA. We 
analysed the document and extracted the mentioned and used SLA parameters in the 
following paragraph. 
 
Extracted SLA parameters 
 Service credit 
 Service renewal 
 Application monthly period  
 Application monthly 
service fees  
 Downtime  
 Error code 
 External connectivity 
 Incident 
 Management Portal 
 Service Level 
 Service Resource 
 Success Code 
 Support Window 
 Claims 
 SLA Limitations 
 Average Error Rate 
 Blob Storage Account 
 Cool Access Tier 
 Hot Access Tier 
 Excluded Transactions 
 Error Rate 
 Failed Storage Transactions 
 Geo Replication Lag 
 Geographically Redundant 
Storage (GRS) Account 
 Locally Redundant Storage 
(LRS) Account 
 Primary Region 
 Read Access 
Geographically Redundant 
Storage (RA-GRS) Account 
 Secondary Region 
 Total Storage Transactions 
 Zone Redundant Storage 
(ZRS) Account 
 Monthly Uptime Percentage 
 

33 
 
2.2.2.2 
Microsoft Azure agreement 
It was updated in January, 2014. It is an agreement that applies to several provided services 
by Microsoft Azure.  It includes some terms and conditions that should be considered when 
subscribing to the service.  As was mentioned in the storage SLA agreement, some used 
terms are not defined in the storage SLA but their definitions could be found in Microsoft 
Azure Agreement. Therefore, we deeply analysed this agreement and extracted the following 
terms that could be related to storage SLA. 
 
Extracted SLA Parameters: 
 
• 
Use of Services 
• 
Security, privacy, and data protection 
• 
Purchasing Services 
• 
Term, termination, and suspension 
• 
Warranties 
• 
Defense of claims 
• 
Limitation of liability 
• 
Software 
• 
Miscellaneous 
• 
Definitions 
 
The aforementioned parameters are identified as the main titles and each of them consists of 
several conditions and terms that could be followed in certain situations.   
 
To conclude, Microsoft Azure storage SLA was mainly concentrating on service uptime, 
service downtime credit and storage location. Moreover, it was specified that Consumers can 
identify the primary region of where their data will be stored. However, they have no control 
on the secondary region. At the end of the storage agreement document, they provided the 

34 
users with several service credits according to different uptime percentages. Yet, no tools or 
coherent way to monitor or check the provided service is clearly provided. 
 
2.2.3 
Google  
Google cloud platform offers several types of services and products to help facilitate and 
simplify the usage of cloud service for a variety of users. In addition, it is one of the most 
popular cloud service providers nowadays and many well-known companies are using it. 
From a storage perspective, it provides us with many storage products such as cloud storage, 
persistent disk and cloud storage for firebase, etc.  
 
Google cloud storage is a storage product provided by Google cloud to help cloud users store 
and manage their data. We decided to focus on this product since it is very similar to the 
storage products that we chose from the previous cloud providers. Moreover, there is a 
comparison between Google storage and Amazon S3 on Google cloud website which could 
point out the similarity between them. We contacted Google through email and asked them to 
provide us with their official SLA for this product. They sent us an email with the link, where 
we started our analysis and extraction of SLA parameters. Three SLA agreements were 
included when evaluating this service SLA. 
 
2.2.3.1 
Google cloud storage SLA 
It is a storage SLA agreement issued between Google provider and consumers when 
subscribing to the service. It was lately modified in October, 2018, and it is considered as the 
SLA agreement for Google cloud storage. It consists of term definitions, financial credits and 
SLA exclusions. We deeply analysed the document and extracted the mentioned and used 
SLA parameters as the following:  
 
• 
Monthly up time percentage 
• 
Financial credits 
• 
Back-off requirements 

35 
 
• 
Covered service 
• 
Error rate 
• 
Valid requests 
• 
Maximum financial credits 
• 
SLA exclusions 
 
2.2.3.2 
Google cloud platform terms of service 
It is an agreement that is signed between Google and google cloud consumers. It was recently 
updated in October, 2018, and it covers most of the service provided by Google and contains 
some term definitions. We reviewed this document to extract the SLA parameters that were 
used and are relevant to cloud storage agreement. The followings are the SLA terms with 
their sub terms.  
 
Extracted SLA parameters: 
 
Table 2.2 Google Cloud Platform Term Extracted SLA parameters 
Provision of the Services 
Services Use                     Accounts 
Console                            New applications and service 
Facilities                           Modifications 
Data Location                       Service Specific Terms and Data Processing and Security 
Terms 
Payment Terms 
Free Quota                       
Invoice disputes and refunds 
Online billing                      
Delinquent payments, suspension   
Taxes                                No purchase order number required 
 

36 
 
Customer Obligations 
Compliance 
                   Third Party Components 
Privacy 
                   Documentation 
Restrictions 
                   Copyright Policy 
Suspension and Removals 
Suspension/Removals                                   Emergency Security Issues 
Intellectual Property Rights; Use of Customer Data; Feedback; Benchmarking. 
Intellectual Property Rights                          Customer Feedback 
Use of Customer Data 
                   Benchmarking 
Technical Support Services 
By Customer 
                  By Google 
Deprecation of Services 
Discontinuance of Services                           Deprecation Policy 
Confidential Information 
Obligations                                                  Required Disclosure 
Term and Termination 
Agreement Term                                          Termination for Breach 
Termination for Inactivity                            Termination for Convenience 
Effect of Termination 
Publicity 
Representations and Warranties 
Disclaimer 
Limitation of Liability 
Limitation on Indirect Liability 
Limitation on Amount of Liability 
Exceptions to Limitations  
Table 2.2 Google Cloud Platform Term Extracted SLA parameters (Continued) 
 

37 
 
 
Indemnification 
By consumer                                           By Google 
Exclusions                                              Conditions  
Remedies                                                Sole rights and obligations 
U.S. Federal Agency Users 
Miscellaneous 
Notices                                                   Assignment 
Change of Control                                   Force Majeure 
No Agency                                              No Waiver 
Severability                                             No Third-Party Beneficiaries 
Equitable Relief                                      U.S. Governing Law 
Amendments                                          Survival 
Entire Agreement                                    Conflicting Terms 
Definitions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2.2 Google Cloud Platform Term Extracted SLA parameters (Continued) 
 

38 
2.2.3.3 
Google service specific terms 
This SLA refers to all types of Google products. In addition, any terms that are not defined in 
the previous SLAs could be found in this document. We analysed the document and 
extracted the terms that are related to Google cloud storage.  
 
Extracted SLA parameters: 
 
• 
Data storage 
• 
Data location 
• 
Transient storage 
• 
Data location limitations 
• 
Bucket lock 
 
To conclude, Google cloud storage is one of the storage products that supplies cloud users 
with several services such as storing, managing and moving their data among different 
storage classes. However, their SLA does not cover the various features they provide. It 
guarantees the user with different service levels and provides the consumer with expected 
monthly uptime in different storage classes. However, it does not provide any measuring 
tools to monitor or check the applicability of these guarantees services. Additionally, it 
primarily speaks about the financial credits and how consumers should apply to get them. 
Yet, it is only towards their future payments not direct refunds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
2.3 
The comparison between the extracted SLA and SLO lists and modern cloud 
providers SLA offers 
2.3.1 
Modern cloud providers SLA offers and the extracted SLA parameters’ list 
Concerning the above mentioned SLA parameters that were extracted from the chosen cloud 
providers’ storage SLAs, we investigated these parameters and confronted them to the list of 
SLA parameters from the previous chapter. The following table contains the first 20 SLA 
parameters that have the highest occurrence percentage in the academia. 
  
2.3.1.1 
The criteria used in the comparison between cloud service providers’ SLA 
offers and the extracted SLA parameters: 
SLA parameters considered mentioned M when:  
 
 
The parameter is mentioned as an SLA parameter and discussed in the document. 
 
The parameter is connected or followed by any SLOs, equations or measures. 
 
The parameter is illustrated by one or more terms or conditions. 
 
Otherwise, the SLA parameter is considered not mentioned NM. In addition, any SLA 
parameter that was only mentioned as an explanation to another SLA parameter is not 
considered mentioned M.  
 
Table 2. 3 The Comparison of Most Studied SLA Parameters and Cloud Providers 
Most studied SLA parameters 
% 
Amazon Microsoft Google 
Availability 
68% 
M 
M 
M 
Security 
68% 
M 
M 
M 
Response time 
57% 
NM 
M 
NM 

40 
 
Most studied SLA parameters 
% 
Amazon Microsoft Google 
Performance 
52% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Reliability 
36% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Privacy 
26% 
M 
M 
M 
Throughput 
26% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Elasticity or Scalability 
26% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Backup and restore 
26% 
M 
M 
M 
Portability 
26% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Usability 
26% 
M 
M 
M 
Service guarantee/Assurance 
26% 
NM 
M 
M 
Termination of service 
21% 
M 
M 
M 
Disaster recovery 
21% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Data location 
21% 
NM 
M 
M 
Cost and Finance 
21% 
M 
M 
M 
Table2. 3 The Comparison of Most Studied SLA Parameters and Cloud 
Providers (Continued) 

41 
 
 
Most studied SLA parameters 
% 
Amazon Microsoft Google 
Governance 
15% 
NM 
NM 
M 
Roles & responsibilities 
15% 
M 
M 
M 
Service violations 
15% 
M 
M 
M 
Storage 
15% 
M 
M 
M 
Final percentage for each cloud provider SLA 
offer 
 
50% 
65% 
65% 
 
M: Mentioned  
 
NM: Not Mentioned  
 
As illustrated at the end of the table, the calculated percentages present the average coverage 
for each cloud provider’s SLA agreement confronted to the SLA parameters’ list from the 
previous chapter. The percentage was calculated as the following:  
 
• 
Let (P) be the percentage for the coverage of each cloud Service provider’s SLA offer  
• 
Let M(n) be the number of how many SLA parameters were covered.  
• 
Let A(n) be the total  number of the used SLA parameters, which is 20 parameters .  
 
P = M(n) X 100   
 
Overall, it can be clearly seen that there is a huge gap between the literature, the ISO 
standards, and the industry when it comes to the SLA agreement and what should be 
included. What’s more, Amazon has the lowest percentage among the other cloud service 
A(n) 
Table2. 3 The Comparison of Most Studied SLA Parameters and Cloud 
Providers (Continued) 

42 
providers although it is considered one of the most popular and most used cloud services. 
Since the coverage percentage of these cloud providers’ SLA was only 65% and less, cloud 
service consumers should think cautiously when they subscribe to these services.  
 
2.3.2 
Modern cloud providers’ SLA offers and the extracted SLO parameters’ list 
We intensely reviewed and analysed Amazon, Google and Microsoft SLA agreement and the 
attached documents to extract any SLO parameters that could be helpful to evaluate and 
monitor the provided service to confront them to the SLO parameters’ list from the previous 
chapter. The following table contains the first 15 SLO parameters that were listed in the first 
SLO parameters bar chart number (figure 1.6) from the previous chapter.  
 
2.3.2.1 
The criteria used in the comparison between cloud service providers’ SLA 
offers and the extracted SLO parameters: 
SLO parameters considered mentioned M when:  
 
 
The parameter is mentioned as an SLO parameter or as a measuring tool that could be 
used to measure the service. 
 
 
The parameter contains any occasions or measures to monitor or check the provided 
service. 
 
Otherwise, the SLO parameter is considered not mentioned NM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Table 2. 4 The Comparison of Most Studied SLO Parameters and Cloud Providers 
Most studied SLO parameters 
% 
Amazon Microsoft Google 
Response time 
36% 
NM 
M 
NM 
Throughput 
26% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Uptime 
15% 
M 
M 
M 
Downtime 
15% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Monitoring Parameters 
10% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Monitoring Mechanisms 
10% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Accessibility Policies 
10% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Maximum Response Time Observation 
10% 
NM 
M 
NM 
Response Time Mean 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Response Time Variance 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Cloud Service Bandwidth 
15% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Limit of Available Cloud service 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Limit of Simultaneous Cloud Service 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Elasticity Speed 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Elasticity Precision 
5% 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Final percentage for each cloud provider SLA offer 
 
6.6% 
20% 
6.6% 
 
M: Mentioned  
 
NM: Not Mentioned  

44 
As showed at the end of the table, the percentage of the coverage for each cloud service 
provider’s SLA offer to the provided SLO parameters are calculated. It presents the average 
coverage for each SLA agreement when we confront it to the SLO parameters’ list from the 
previous chapter. The percentage was calculated as the following:  
• 
Let (P) be the percentage for the coverage of each cloud Service provider’s SLA offer  
• 
Let M(n) be the number of how many SLO parameters were covered  
• 
Let A(n) be the total  number of the used SLO parameters, which is 15 parameters   
 
P = M(n) X 100   
 
The final percentages for the covered SLO parameters show how poor and incomplete these 
agreements are. All the documents we investigated and studied have not mentioned any 
measures or SLOs only in a few points. For example, In Microsoft Azure, there was a 
formula to help users calculate the amount of monthly uptime percentage. The formula is 
100% (uptime) - the average error rate, which was also indicated in the SLA details section, 
how to calculate the average error rate for each month. Nevertheless, there were many SLA 
parameters mentioned with no connected SLOs or any methods to check or monitor them. 
Consequently, the percentages show that the agreements are void and these cloud service 
providers should not be trusted, considering that the provided SLA parameters are not 
supported by enough measures and users have no control over their data.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A(n) 

45 
 
2.4 
Observations and conclusion 
In following paragraphs the observations on the previously mentioned cloud service 
providers is presented, addressing the reviewed SLA agreements and their coverage.  
 
 After reviewing all the above mentioned documents, these cloud service provider’s focus 
mostly on the finance. Money is an important subject when consumers decide to 
subscribe to a service. However, it is not as vital as the rest of the parameters.  A huge 
part of these cloud provider’s SLAs speaks about how cloud service consumers could get 
service credits and when they are not applicable for it. For Amazon, Microsoft and 
Google, service credits are paid towards your future monthly bills, so no cash or refund is 
given, but what if the cloud service consumer was deeply damaged due to the service 
failure and decided to terminate the service. How could he/she get their service credits?   
 
 Concerning the data location. Microsoft uses two regions to store and replicate the data, 
which are the primary region and the secondary region. They allow cloud service 
consumers to specify the primary region and where their data could be stored. However, 
they don’t have such control on the secondary region. While at Google, consumers can 
choose the location where they want their data to be stored through data location 
selection. However, if the location they choose is not covered in the service specific 
terms, Google have the control to store the data at any of their facilities. In Google’s 
SLA, they mentioned that when Google controls the data location based on the scenario 
mentioned above, Google is just a data processor. Yet, they don’t provide any methods or 
measures cloud service consumers can use to check and insure the credibility and the 
applicability of their claim.  
 
 Another issue that concerns the data location is Geo replication lag. Microsoft does not 
give any guarantees regarding the time that will take data to be replicate in the secondary 
region. Microsoft did not indicate what will happen if any service violations related to 
data occur and the data is not replicated yet in the secondary region. This could cause the 
users a lot of trouble.  

46 
 Based on this research, there is a huge gap between the literature, the ISO standards and 
the industry regarding the definition, the use and the connections between the SLA and 
SLO parameters. SLA and SLO parameters have different definitions from an article to 
another. Some consider parameters as SLA parameters while others consider them as an 
SLO parameter, so there is a huge confusion between both parameters. This issue should 
be solved so that cloud service providers and consumers can use the same reference when 
defining or using cloud service SLA and SLO parameters. 
 
 There are no tools, methods or measures provided for the cloud service users to check the 
provided service. On each SLA, you can find several SLA parameters that are defined but 
are not supported or connected to any SLOs or measurements. How the service could be 
monitored if there are no provided methods to do that? Since consumers have no control 
over their data and cloud service providers could not be trusted, and due to the lack of 
measures and the insufficient connections between the SLA parameters and the SLO 
parameters, these agreements could be considered void.  
 
 Some SLA parameters such as performance, reliability, disaster recovery, etc., were only 
illustrated as features for Amazon, Microsoft and Google’s provided services. However, 
these parameters were only mentioned in other SLA parameters definitions. They just 
indicated them in their SLAs and do not provide the connected SLOs to check them. For 
example, in Amazon, disaster recovery could be found as a feature of Amazon service but 
in their SLA they do not include it as an SLA parameter or provide the user with measures 
such as Recovery Time Objective (RTO), which is the maximum time required to recover 
the data in case of disaster.  
 
 Azure storage gives guarantees regarding the read and write of data in different storage in 
cool accesses tire at the very beginning of its SLA document. However, there is no 
mention of any provided tools or measures to check or assure theses guarantees.   
 

47 
 
 During the period when this research was conducted, the studied cloud service providers 
updated and modified their SLA repeatedly. For example, Google updated their SLA 
twice or three times a month. Amazon had the same issue too but less frequent. This can 
show how these clouds service providers are in doubt and not sure of what to put in their 
SLAs. 
 
 Google specified in their agreements that they have the right to modify their SLA 
agreements and their prices from time to time. What’s more, if cloud service consumers 
do not accept these modifications, the only option they have is to stop using the service. 
How could cloud service consumers trust this cloud provider, when their SLAs or the 
service prices could be changed any time and they should accept these modifications? 
 
 Another issue that we faced when we were reviewing these cloud providers’ portals and 
their SLAs is the low usability of these SLA documents. There are too many attached 
documents to review that users should find. In addition, in some cases, there are no links 
to these documents. It was very confusing and distracting to study these SLAs and find all 
their related documents. It would be extremely helpful if all the information users need to 
review was in the same document, so that cloud service consumers will not get confused 
going from a document to another.  
 
 Microsoft indicates in their SLA that there is a possibility that other companies could be 
hired to provide some services on behalf of them. They demonstrate that these companies 
are not allowed to use the consumers’ data. However, there is no way cloud service 
consumers could assure their credibility and guarantee that their data is not going to be 
used by a third party.  
 
In the following chapter, we will introduce a new toolkit that can assist Cloud service users 
in the process of creating an SLA and allow them to achieve more controllability over their 
data. 
 
 

 
 

 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 
PROPOSED SLA TOOLKIT 
In this chapter, we will propose an SLA toolkit to enhance the creation process of SLA 
agreement and help cloud service providers and consumers through the SLA lifecycle 
negotiation stage.  
 
3.1 
Cloud computing SLA life cycle 
There are many proposals in the academia for SLA life cycle, However there is no widely 
accepted SLA life cycle in the literature (Maarouf, Marzouk & Haqiq, 2015, P.2). Cloud 
computing SLA life cycle consists of several stages that demonstrate the process of creating 
an SLA agreement.  
 
 
Figure 3.1 Classic SLA management Life Cycle  
Taken from Faniyi & Bahsoon ( 2015, P.3) 
 
According to Faniyi (Figure.3.1), Service level agreement (SLA) life cycle consists of five 
phases, which are Negotiation, Establishment, Monitoring, Violation Management and 
Reporting and Termination (Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015, P.3). One of the most crucial phases 

50 
is the negotiation phase. Negotiation is the first stage where cloud service providers and 
consumers discuss and negotiate the service level required and the SLA contents. “In this 
phase, cloud service consumers decide which cloud service provider has the best offer that 
can meet their requirements and discuss the required service level. However, SLA 
negotiation is usually more complicated than other SLA lifecycle phases” (Terfas et al., 
2018). This phase could be very ambiguous and confusing for both cloud service provider 
and consumer. 
 
 According to Venticinque, unsupported dynamic negotiation process could result in a 
poorly constructed SLA, which can also lead to many other issues that cloud service 
consumers could face, such as SLA violations (Venticinque, Aversa & Martino, 2010, 
P.1). SLA violation is one of the challenges cloud computing is facing. However, 
predefined SLA parameters could be the solution to help in the early detection of these 
violations (Terfas et al., 2018, P.11). The definition of SLA parameters is very important 
for both cloud service providers and consumers. Therefore, based on Terfas, “the 
predefined SLA parameters in early stage of SLA lifecycle can affect the whole SLA 
lifecycle and influence the level of service required” (Terfas et al., 2018, P.11). This step 
could be done during the SLA negotiation stage to insure that the service level will be 
provided as expected. Cloud service consumers should be given the opportunity to prepare 
the list of SLA parameters required for their service and follow cloud service providers 
during the negation process to create a well-constructed SLA agreement that covers all the 
requirements and assist them to choose the best cloud service provider among all the 
provided offers (Terfas et al., 2018, P.11). In accordance with the previously discussed 
issues, a toolkit to help cloud service consumers choose the most appropriate cloud service 
provider and be more prepared and confident during the negotiation and the establishment 
phases is introduced. 
 
3.2 
SLA toolkit  
Cloud service provider selection process could be complicated and difficult to achieve for 
some cloud service consumers. Moreover, the negotiation stage is also known as a bottleneck 

51 
 
(Dastjerdi & Buyya, 2012, P.1). Based on all these indicated issues, an SLA toolkit to 
facilitate the negotiation phase process and help in the selection of cloud service provider is 
proposed. 
 
There are many SLA toolkits available in the modern market that consumers have to 
purchase in order to use. They provide a pre-defined check list of SLA parameters to be 
considered in their SLA creation process (Terfas et al., 2018, P.11). The proposed SLA 
toolkit was developed as the result of the analysis that was conducted on these toolkits and 
the SLA parameters list from the previous chapter.  
 
The Toolkit is built of three components: 
 
• The SLA parameters list from chapter 1, which contain the most Studied SLA 
parameters in the academia.  
• An SLA parameter identification form (Figure 3.2), and  
• An SLA Toolkit Work Process (Figure 3.3). 
 
3.2.1 
How does it work 
As illustrated in the previous section, Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.3, the SLA toolkit could 
address all the SLA parameters included in the most studied SLA parameters list which was 
discussed in the chapter 1. This toolkit could be a good start to help end users control their 
data and assess them in the process of creating SLA agreements. 
 

52 
 
Figure 3.2 SLA Parameters Identification Form 

53 
 
 
Figure 3.3 SLA Toolkit Work Process 
 
As shown in Figure 3.3, the SLA Toolkit Work Process consists of 4 steps: 
 
Step.1: Using the proposed SLA parameter identification form, cloud service consumer 
should identify and choose all the required SLA parameters. Step1 should be done before the 
beginning of the negotiation phase. 
 
Step.2: Once the negotiation process begin, the cloud service consumer has to discuss and 
review all the chosen SLA parameters with cloud service provider to specify the service level 
required and the degree of compliance for each cloud service provider. When cloud service 
provider agrees to a certain requirement of the consumer, the corresponding SLA parameter 
should be checked as “Yes”, otherwise “No” checkbox is chosen. Moreover, the possible 
alternative in case of “No” should be discussed and illustrated in Notes section. 
 
Example: The cloud service consumer X identifies the SLA parameter of Data Location as 
required. Therefore, cloud service provider will note that it is vital for cloud consumer to 

54 
know where the data is stored. If cloud service provider agrees to provide such information, 
“Yes” is chosen. On the other hand, if cloud service provider declines to specify the location, 
then “No” is chosen and the cloud service consumer should write in the Notes section 
whether the cloud provider proposes any other alternatives, like specifying several locations 
data could be stored in but not the exact location. These notes will be used in the next step. 
 
Step.3: In this step, cloud service consumers have to evaluate the level of compliance for 
each cloud service provider by checking which cloud service provider’s offer adheres more 
to the requested requirements. 
 
NOTE: This evaluation can be easily performed in a rudimentary form by assigning numeric 
value of “1” to “Yes”, a value of “0” to “No”, a weight scale reflecting the importance of the 
given parameter (for example 0-5) and calculating the weighted average for all parameters in 
the form.  
 
The note section will be used in case there are cloud service providers with the same level of 
compliance. Consumers have to review the note section for any additional information that 
could help to distinguish between them. 
 
Step.4: Finally, using the aforementioned information, cloud service consumer will be able 
to choose the most suitable cloud service provider that can cover all the required SLA 
parameters or provide appropriate alternatives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
3.3 
Conclusion  
Service Level Agreement is a contract signed between two parties, which are cloud service 
consumer and provider. It intends to help cloud service consumers to identify the service 
level (SL) requested and present their quality requirements (QRs) to cloud service provider. 
Therefore, it assists cloud service provider to recognize all consumers’ needs. The process of 
creating an SLA agreement is ambiguous and difficult to follow. In addition, in chapter 2, we 
found out that cloud service consumers privileges with existing cloud service providers are 
limited, they cannot find all their required SLA parameters in the offered agreements and the 
level of controllability on their data is low. Therefore, the proposed SLA toolkit would assist 
cloud service consumers during this process especially in the negotiation phase. It will help 
cloud service consumers clearly discuss their requirements and SLA parameters with their 
cloud providers to achieve a better service level.  Moreover, it can help cloud consumers 
evaluate the pre- defined SLAs of cloud service providers. It intends to facilitate the Cloud 
service providers’ selection process and help the consumer to choose the most applicable 
cloud service provider. This presented SLA toolkit will also insure cloud service consumer 
gain more controllability on their data to increase the level of trust between these two parties.  
 
The next section concludes this thesis document 
 
 

 
 
 

 
CONCLUSION 
In this thesis, we conducted a literature review to identify the most studied and the least 
studied SLA and SLO parameters in the academia. To do so, we analysed several articles and 
extracted the mentioned SLA and SLO parameters. Then, we calculated the percentages of 
occurrence for each parameter to find out which SLA and SLO parameters have the highest 
and the lowest occurrence percentages. Finally, we generated a list of the most and least 
studied SLA and SLO parameters in the literature based on their occurrence percentage. 
 
 After that, we used this list to investigate the coverage of three well known cloud service 
providers in the modern market. We confronted their SLA agreements to this list and 
calculated the coverage percentage for each one. Finally, we provided our observations on 
each cloud service provider’s SLA agreement. 
 
At the end of this thesis, we proposed an SLA toolkit that would help cloud service 
consumers gain more controllability over their data. It enhances the process of SLA creation 
for both cloud service provider and consumer. Moreover, it assists them through the stages of 
an SLA lifecycle and helps cloud service consumers in the selection of the most appropriate 
cloud service provider that best adheres to their requirements.  
 
Conference Papers 
Published 
• Terfas, H., Suryn, W., Roy, J., & Eftekhar, S. M. (2018). Extending ISO/IEC 19086 
Cloud Computing SLA standards to support cloud service users with the SLA 
negotiation process. SQM XXVI, 127. 
 


 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Cloud computing is a large field that is developing every day to suit the needs and 
requirements of various types of users. Several researches are intended to enhance the use of 
cloud computing services and decrease the incidents that could occur and violate the service 
level requested. As aforementioned in the previous chapters, in academia and industry SLA 
and SLO parameters are not well defined and are used differently. Therefore, as a future 
work, we are planning to develop an extensive list that would cover as many as possible in 
given market and industry circumstances cloud computing SLA and SLO parameters. This 
list should involve definitions for all the included SLA and SLO parameters.  After that we 
will propose a model that should contain all these SLA parameters connected to their SLO 
parameters and measures to give the end users more controllability over their data and allow 
them to trust their cloud service providers. 
 
 
 


 
ANNEX I 
 
 
SLA AND SLO PARAMETERS EXTRACTION 
In this annex I, we will present the tables that contain all the extracted SLA and SLO 
parameters addressing the sources, where they were discussed and derived from. 
 
Table-A I- 1: ISO Standard 19086 
Cloud computing ─ Service Level Agreement(SLA) framework and terminology 19086-1— 
Part 1 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• 
Covered Service 
• 
 
• 
Cloud SLA Definitions 
• 
 
• 
Service Monitoring 
• 
Monitoring Parameters 
• 
Monitoring Mechanisms 
• 
Roles and Responsibilities 
• 
 
• 
Accessibility 
• 
Accessibility Standards 
• 
Accessibility  Policies 
• 
Availability 
• 
Availability(uptime and downtime) 
• 
Cloud service performance 
• 
Cloud service response time 
• 
Cloud Service maximum Response Time 
Observation 
• 
Cloud Service Response Time Mean 
• 
Cloud Service Response Time Variance 
• 
Cloud service performance 
• 
Cloud service capacity 
• 
Limited of Simultaneous Cloud Service Connections 
• 
Limitation of Available Cloud Service Resources 
• 
Cloud Service Throughput 
• 
Cloud Service Bandwidth 
• 
Cloud service performance 
• 
Elasticity 
• 
Elasticity Speed 
• 
Elasticity Precision 
• 
Protection of Personally 
Identifiable Information (PII) 
Erasure period for temporary files 
Log information deletion period (where logs contain PII) 
Notification period for a data breach 
Geographical location(s) for PII storage and processing 
• 
Check ISO 19086-4 
 

62 
 
Cloud computing ─ Service Level Agreement(SLA) framework and terminology 19086-1— 
Part 1 
SLAs 
SLOs 
Information Security 
Still under study 
Termination of service 
Data retention period 
Log retention period 
Notification of Service Termination 
Return of Assets 
Cloud Service Support 
Support Hours 
Service Incident Support Hours 
Service Incident Notification Time 
Maximum First Support Response Time 
Maximum Incident Resolution Time 
Support Plans 
Support Methods 
Support Contracts  
Service Incident Reporting  
Service Incident Notification 
Governance component 
Regulation Adherence 
Standards Adherence 
Policy Adherence 
Audit Schedule  
Changes to the cloud service 
features and functionality 
Minimum Service Change Notification Period 
Minimum Time Before Feature/Function Deprecation 
Service Change Notification Method 
Service reliability 
Service resilience/fault tolerance 
component 
Time to Service Recovery (TTSR) 
Mean Time to Service Recovery 
Maximum Time to Service Recovery (MTTSR) 
Number of Service Failures 
Service resilience/fault tolerance method 
Service reliability 
Customer data backup and restore 
Backup Interval 
Retention Period for Backup Data 
Number of Backup Generations 
Backup Restoration Testing 
Backup Method 
Backup Verification 
Backup Restoration Test Reporting 
Alternative Methods for data recovery 
Data Backup Storage Location 
Service reliability 
Disaster recovery 
Recovery Time Objective (RTO) 
Recovery Point Objective (RPO) 
Cloud Service Provider Disaster Recovery Plan 
Table-A I- 1: ISO Standard 19086(Continued) 
 

63 
 
 
Cloud computing ─ Service Level Agreement(SLA) framework and terminology 19086-1— 
Part 1 
SLAs 
SLOs 
Data management 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
component 
Intellectual Property Rights 
Data management 
Cloud Service Customer Data 
Cloud Service Customer Data 
Cloud Service Customer Data Usage 
Data management 
Cloud Service provider Data 
Provider Data 
Data management 
Account  Data Component 
Account Data 
Data management 
Derived Data 
Derived Data 
Derived Data Usage 
Derived Data Access 
Data management 
Data Portability 
Data Portability Capabilities 
Data management 
Data deletion 
Data Deletion Time 
Data Deletion Process 
Data Deletion Notification 
Data management 
Data location 
Data Location 
Data Location Specification Capability 
Data Location Policy 
Data management 
Data examination 
Data Examination 
Data management 
Law enforcement access 
Law Enforcement Requests 
Attestations, certifications and 
audits 
Cloud Service Attestations 
Cloud Service Certifications 
Cloud Service Audits 
A brief preview of the paper: 
ISO/IEC 19086 cloud computing Service level agreement (SLA) framework was 
recently published to clarify the definition of cloud computing (SLA) between cloud 
service providers and cloud service consumers. It consists of four parts. ISO/IEC 
19086-1 part one is an overview and term definitions of cloud computing SLA. 
 
 
 
Table-A I- 1: ISO Standard 19086(Continued) 
 

64 
Table-A I- 2: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Service level agreement framework for e-commerce cloud end-user perspective 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Availability 
•  
• Scalability 
•  
• Portability 
•  
• Performance 
• Response time 
• Throughput 
• Security  
• Authenticity 
• Data Integrity 
• Data Confidentiality 
• Privacy 
• Reliability 
• Service Reliability 
• Message Reliability 
• Usability 
•  
• Backup&Recovery 
•  
• Data location 
•  
A brief preview of the paper: (Busalim, Hussin, & Ibrahim, 2013) 
In this paper, the authors proposed a new SLA framework for E-commerce cloud 
service with respect to the end user perspectives. They provided a list of the most 
applicable SLA parameters and their objectives, which should be considered 
when initiating an SLA framework for E-commerce cloud. These parameters will 
help reducing the risks and challenges that face E-commerce cloud end users.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
Table-A I- 3: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Monitoring and Management of Service Level Agreements in Cloud Computing 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• 
Response time 
• 
Time to order.  
• 
Time to delivery.  
• 
Delay in end to end transaction.  
• 
Failed service re-quest rate 
• 
Availability of service rate  
A brief preview of the paper: (Anithakumari & K, 2015) 
In this paper, a framework to detect SLA violations by monitoring its parameters has 
been proposed. Using the results of the predicted SLA violations, helped initiating an 
adaptive resource allocation system, which tries to reduce any SLA violations may 
occur.  
In this experiment, an online shopping service SLA was used as an example, and only 
one SLA parameter was monitored and analysed including its Service level objectives 
at runtime.  
 
Table-A I- 4: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Adaptable Service Level Objective Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Service 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• availability 
•  
• Accounting of services, 
•  
• IT continuity plans 
•  
• service development plans 
•  
• Terminologies 
•  
• Escalation plan 
•  
 
 

66 
 
Adaptable Service Level Objective Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Guidelines for priorities 
•  
• Responsibilities 
of 
both 
customer and company 
•  
• Data of both parties 
•  
• Service of both times 
•  
• Accomplishment penalties 
•  
• Signing an ID 
•  
• Termination reason 
•  
A brief preview of the paper:(Frey, Luthje, Teckelmann, & Reich, 2013) 
 Most cloud providers offer a standard SLA for their customers. However, customers’ 
needs and requirements are distinct from each other most of the time. This issue is 
usually facing companies and individuals when trying to move their work or data to 
the cloud.  
In this paper, the authors are suggesting to create a special SLA for each customer 
respecting all related SLOs that are needed to evaluate and measure the service. They 
only mentioned the parts that each SLA should contain and present an USECASE 
about Availability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A I- 4: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

67 
Table-A I- 5: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Cloud Service Level Agreement. Encyclopedia of Cloud Computing 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Availability 
•  
• Response time 
•  
• Disaster recovery 
•  
• Ticket resolution 
•  
• Data backups 
•  
• Throughput 
•  
• Data storage location 
•  
• Data‐redundancy 
•  
• Data privacy policies 
•  
• Service renewals 
•  
• Service Restoration 
•  
• Service Acceptable Usage 
Policy 
•  
• Service Guarantee Granularity 
•  
• Service guarantee exclusions 
•  
• Service Credit 
•  
• Service Violation Detection and 
Measurement 
•  
• Service Activation and 
Deactivation(Service 
termination) 
•  
• Service Excess Use 
•  
• Service Transferability 
(portability) 
•  
• Security 
•  
• Performance 
 
•  

68 
 
Cloud Service Level Agreement. Encyclopedia of Cloud Computing 
A brief preview of the paper: (San & Irena, 2016) 
Considering the lack of standardization cloud computing is suffering from, most 
cloud consumers face several challenges in term of choosing the appropriate cloud 
provider. In this chapter, the author precisely explains the most important elements to 
consider in an SLA, and then provides two real-life examples of the most popular 
cloud providers in the market (Amazon and Rackspace). At the end, the author 
discusses how SLA could be defined by the cloud provider in the future to help cloud 
consumer compare and choose the best cloud provider that matches their 
requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A I- 5: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

69 
Table-A I- 6: Extracted SLA and SLO 
On Service Level Agreement Assurance in Cloud Computing Data Centers 
SLAs 
SLOs 
Cloud service performance 
Response time 
User to user time 
Delay time 
End to end delay 
MOS(Mean Opinion Score) 
Jitter 
packet loss 
A brief preview of the paper: (Zainelabden, Ibrahim, Kliazovich, & Bouvry, 
2016) 
Service level agreement is a contract that is made between cloud provider and cloud 
consumer to identify the level of service required by the consumer and delivered by 
the provider. However, there are no guidelines or methods to validate and confirm 
that the quality of service will be delivered as mention in the SLA. In this paper, the 
authors proposed a framework to assure the SLA and guarantee the service. This 
framework could be useful for both cloud providers and consumers.  
In contrast to all previous frameworks, this framework concentrates mostly on 
evaluating the performance of the cloud and help providing a better service quality 
which concerns both cloud providers and consumers.   
 
Table-A I- 7: Extracted SLA and SLO 
A comprehensive review on QoS measures for resource allocation in cloud 
environment 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Reliability in Storage 
•  
•  High network Bandwidth 
•  
• Resource Availability 
•  

70 
 
 
A comprehensive review on QoS measures for resource allocation in cloud 
environment 
• Security 
•  
• Confidentiality 
•  
• Integrity 
•  
• Reliability and Fast Access 
•  
• Flexibility and Creative User 
group Infrastructure Service 
•  
• Testing time. 
•  
• Latency 
•  
• Data Backup 
•  
• Visibility 
•  
•  Good Response 
•  
• Usability 
•  
• Portability 
•  
• Reliability 
•  
A brief preview of the paper: (Shiny & Vignesh, 2017)  
In this paper, the authors focused on resource allocation in cloud computing service 
and discussed the most common issues that might face cloud providers and 
consumers. According to the QoS metrics, SLA violation is one of the challenges that 
might affect cloud provider in resource allocation.   
They present several resource allocation methods and point out the QoS requirements 
that an end user expected in different applications when it comes to resource 
allocation. These requirements could be considered as SLA elements that have to be 
met when offering a certain service.   
Table-A I- 7: Extracted SLA and SLO(Continued)

71 
Table-A I- 8: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Quality of service and service level agreements for cloud environments: Issues and 
challenges 
SLAs 
SLOs 
Availability 
 
Reliability 
 
Scalability 
 
Security 
 
Trust 
 
performance supervision 
 
Service description  
 
Problem administration 
 
Consumer responsibilities and 
accountabilities 
 
Licenses and cures 
 
Reservation 
 
Recovery(catastrophe recovery) 
 
Service Termination 
 
Service Assurance(Provider side) 
 
fault perseverance time(P) 
 
Service Assurance Time Period(P) 
 
Response time(P) 
 
Service assurance granularity(P) 
 
Service guarantee(P) 
 
Service recognition(P) 
 
Service Violation Measurement and 
Reporting(P) 
 
A brief preview of the paper: (Chana & Singh, 2014) 
In this paper, the relation between quality of service QoS and cloud computing is 
discussed. The authors focused more on the relation between QoS and the SLA 
agreement. How cloud service providers can assure the level of QoS provided to the 
consumers. They also discussed the elements that should be considered in an SLA 
and the challenges that an SLA could face.  

72 
Table-A I- 9: Extracted SLA and SLO 
A Framework for Negotiating Service Level Agreement of Cloud-based Services 
SLAs 
SLOs (KPI metrics) 
• Usability 
• Accessibility 
• Client personal requirements 
• Installability 
• Learnability 
• Operability 
• Transparency 
• understandability 
• Accountability 
• Auditability 
• Compliance 
• Contacting experience 
• Data ownership 
• Ease of doing business 
• Governance 
• Provider SLA Verification 
• sustainability 
• Agility 
• Adaptability 
• Capacity 
• Elasticity 
• Extensibility 
• Flexibility 
• Portability 
• Scalability 
• Assurance 
• Availability 
• Maintainability 
• Recoverability 
• Reliability 
• Fault-Tolerance 
• Service stability 
• Service-ability 
• Financial 
• Acquisition cost 
• On-going cost 
• Profit or cost sharing 
• Performance 
• Accuracy 
• Functionality 
• Suitability 
• Interoperability 
• Response time 
• Throughput 

73 
 
A Framework for Negotiating Service Level Agreement of Cloud-based Services 
SLAs 
SLOs (KPI metrics) 
• Security and Privacy 
• Access control 
• Data geographic 
• Data integrity 
• confidentiality 
• Data privacy and data loss 
• Physical, environmental 
• Threat and vulnerability 
• Retention, Disposition 
A brief preview of the paper:(El-Awadi & Abu-Rizka, 2015) 
The market of cloud computing is getting more and more competitive every day. 
Therefore, choosing the best and most appropriate cloud provider would be a huge 
issue that faces all cloud consumers. In this paper, the authors present a new 
framework that would solve this matter by helping cloud consumers making the right 
decision and choose the most relevant cloud provider that matches their requirements. 
This framework will allow cloud consumers to evaluate several cloud providers’ 
offers and select among them. The authors also support their framework by a case 
study to show.  
 
Table-A I- 10: Extracted SLA and SLO 
SMICloud: A Framework for Comparing and Ranking Cloud Services 
SLAs(high/top level attributes) 
SLOs (KPIs) 
• Accountability(This 
service attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Auditability 
• Compliance 
• data ownership, 
• provider ethicality 
• sustainability 
•  
Table-A I- 9: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 
 

74 
 
SMICloud: A Framework for Comparing and Ranking Cloud Services 
SLAs(high/top level attributes) 
SLOs (KPIs) 
• Agility(This service 
attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Elasticity 
• Portable 
• Adaptable 
•  flexible 
•  
• Assurance of Service(This 
service attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Reliability 
• resiliency 
• service stability 
•  
• Cost 
•  
• Performance(This service 
attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Functionality 
• service response time 
• Accuracy. 
•  
• Security and Privacy(This 
service attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Privacy 
• Data loss  
• Integrity 
•  
• Usability(This service 
attribute depends on 
multiple factors such as) 
• Accessibility 
• Installability 
• Learnability 
• Operatibility 
•  
•  
• Service Response Time 
• Average response time 
• Maximum Response Time 
• Response Time Failure 
Table-A I- 10: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued)

75 
 
SMICloud: A Framework for Comparing and Ranking Cloud Services 
SLAs(high/top level attributes) 
SLOs (KPIs) 
•  
• Sustainability 
• Service sustainability 
• Environmental Sustainability 
•  
• Suitability 
• number of non-essential features provided by 
service 
• number of non-essential features required by the 
customer 
•  
• Accuracy 
• frequency of failure 
•  
• Transparency 
•  
• Interoperability 
•  
• Availability 
• Total time for which the service was not 
available 
•  
• Reliability 
• Mean time to failure 
• Number of failure 
•  
• Stability 
•  
• Cost 
• acquisition  
• on-going 
•  
• Adaptability 
•  
• Elasticity 
• mean time taken to expand 
• maximum capacity 
•  
• Usability 
A brief preview of the paper: (Garg, Versteeg, & Buyya, 2011) 
Cloud computing is growing rapidly and a lot of companies and individuals are 
transferring their business into the cloud. Yet the only challenge that concerns the 
consumers is how to choose the best and most convenient cloud provider that 
matches their requirements. In this paper, the authors proposed a framework and a 
mechanism that could help in solving this problem. According to the user 
requirements, The suggested platform can compare several cloud providers and assist 
the user to decide the best offers that can match his needs.  
Table-A I- 10: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

76 
Table-A I- 11: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Conceptual SLA framework for cloud computing 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Availability 
•  
• Scalability 
•  
• Response time. 
•  
• Security and privacy 
•  
• Performance 
• response time         CPU capacity 
• SLA metrics for 
IAAS(consumer)  
• CPU capacity 
• Memory size  
• Boot time  
• Storage  
• Scale  
• Scale down  
• Scale up time  
• Scale down time  
• Auto scaling  
• Max number can be 
configured on physical 
server 
• Availability 
• Response time 
•  
• SLA metrics for 
PAAS(consumer)   
• Integration  
• Scalability 
• Pay as you go billing  
• Environments of 
deployment 
• Servers 
• Browsers 
• Number of developers 
•  
• SLA metrics for 
SAAS(consumer) 
• Reliability  
• Usability  
• Scalability  
• Availability  
• Customizability   
•  

77 
 
Conceptual SLA framework for cloud computing 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• SLA Metrics for 
storage as a service 
• Geographic location 
• Scalability  
• Storage space 
• Storage billing  
• Security  
• Backup  
• Recovery  
• System throughput  
• Transferring bandwidth 
• Data life cycle 
management 
•  
• Monitoring 
•  
• Billing 
•  
• Security 
•  
• Networking 
 
 
• Privacy 
 
 
• Local and international 
policies 
 
• Support service 
 
A brief preview of the paper: (Alhamad, Dillon, & Chang, 2010) 
In this paper, the authors discussed the negotiation process and some strategies that 
are used. Moreover, they presented the essential criteria that should be used in the 
stage of an SLA design. They also proposed a method to retain the trust level between 
cloud service provider and consumer. 
 
 
Table-A I- 11: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

78 
Table-A I- 12: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Low level Metrics to High level SLAs - LoM2HiS framework: Bridging the gap 
between monitored metrics and SLA parameters in cloud environments 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Availability 
• Downtime (mean time to repair (MTTR)) 
• Uptime (mean time between failure (MTBF)) 
• Response time 
• In bytes, 
• out bytes, 
• packet size, 
• avail .bandwidth in, 
• avail .bandwidth out 
• Storage 
• disk space 
• Memory 
•  
• Incoming Bandwidth •  
• Outgoing Bandwidth  •  
A brief preview of the paper: (Emeakaroha, Brandic, Maurer, & Dustdar, 2010). 
In this paper, a new framework to detect SLA violation is proposed. This framework 
could help in the detection of SLA threats and inform the enactor component. They 
also present an experimental to prove their work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
Table-A I- 13: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Continuous and Distributed Monitoring of Cloud SLAs Using S3LACC 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Availability 
• Availability percentage 
• Maximum number of outage per month  
• Maximum duration per outage   
• Response time 
•  
• Throughput 
•  
A brief preview of the paper: (Ghumman & Schill, 2017) 
In this paper, the authors discussed the SLA lifecycle and presented a method that 
minimize the amount of communications of SLA violations.  This proposed work is 
applicable for service that is used at one location or more. 
 
Table-A I- 14: Extracted SLA and SLO 
A Systematic Review of Service Level Management in the Cloud 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Allowable violation 
•  Maximum fraction of SLO violations 
allowed 
• Availability 
• Percentage uptime or downtime 
• Bandwidth 
• Throughput (KB/s or MBit/s), data 
transfer time, round trip time 
• Cost 
• Dollars, electricity prices, VM cost per 
time unit, revenue per request 
• CPU cycle 
• MIPS, MHz, number of 
cores/CPU/vCPU/cycles, CPU utilization/ 
consumption/speed 
• Duration of service 
• Length of SLA time window, service time, 
execution time 
• Energy 
• Cost per kWh, power (watts) 
• Memory 
• MB, GB 
• Penalty rate 
• SaaS VM parameter, average penalty ($) 
 

80 
 
A Systematic Review of Service Level Management in the Cloud 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Performance 
• Throughput (MB/sec), response time, 
MIPS, latency, execution time, deadline, 
job processing time 
• Request arrival rate 
• Customer QoS parameter, request/sec, 
arrival rate factor (user side) 
• Security 
•  
• Space/Storage 
• GB, I/O access (read size in MB) 
• Upgrade request frequency 
• Customer QoS parameter 
• Others  
• Intensity rate generator, VM initiation 
time, client classification 
(gold/silver/bronze), priority of job, 
number of VMs 
• Cloud federation SLA 
parameters: Availability 
•  
• bandwidth 
•  
• Cost  
•  
• CPU cycle 
•  
• Duration of service 
•  
• Penalty rate 
•  
• Performance 
•  
• Request arrival rate  
•  
• Security  
•  
• Space/ storage  
•  
• SaaS SLA parameters: 
Allowable violation 
•  
• CPU cycle 
•  
• duration of service 
•  
• Memory 
•  
 
 
 
 
Table-A I- 14: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

81 
 
 
A Systematic Review of Service Level Management in the Cloud 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• penalty rate 
•  
• performance 
•  
• request arrival rate 
•  
• service initiation time 
•  
• space/storage 
•  
• upgrade request frequency 
•  
• PaaS SLA parameters: cost 
•  
• performance 
•  
• IaaS SLA parameters: 
availability  
•  
• bandwidth 
•  
• cost 
•  
• CPU cycle 
•  
• energy 
•  
• memory 
•  
• penalty rate 
•  
• performance 
•  
• request arrival rate 
•  
• space/storage 
•  
• StaaS SLA parameters: 
performance 
•  
• storage/space 
•  
• NaaS SLA parameters: 
Bandwidth 
•  
• DaaS SLA parameters: 
performance  
•  
• Other SLA parameters: CPU 
cycle, memory 
•  
A brief preview of the paper:(Faniyi & Bahsoon, 2015) 
In this paper, a survey on cloud computing SLA was conducted to help improving the 
structure of cloud SLAs and their management.  
& we consider the presented unit of measure as an SLO to the proposed SLA 
parameters.  
The presented parameters where ordered based on different cloud level of 
abstractions 
Table-A I- 14: Extracted SLA and SLO (Continued) 

82 
Table-A I- 15: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Real-Time and Proactive SLA Renegotiation for a Cloud-Based System 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Throughput  
•   
• Availability  
•  
• Response time  
•  
•  
•  
•  
•  
•  
•  
A brief preview of the paper: (Paputungan, Hani, Hassan, & Asirvadam, 2018) 
In this article, the authors introduced a real time negotiation model to support the 
negation process in the cloud. They presented a new method to detect service 
violation to guarantee better negotiation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
Table-A I- 16: Extracted SLA and SLO 
SelCSP: A Framework to Facilitate Selection of Cloud Service Providers 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• Security  
Controls: User access authorization/restriction, 
User access revocation, Roles/Responsibilities, 
Segregation of duties, Encryption, Encryption 
key 
management, 
Vulnerability/ 
Patch 
management, 
Anti-virus/malicious 
software, 
Audit tool access, Incident reporting, Network 
security, Remote user multi-factor authentication  
• Availability 
•  
• Response time 
•  
• Throughput 
•  
• Reliability trust 
•  
• Decision trust 
•  
• Reputation 
•  
• Compliance 
•  
• Data Governance 
•  
• Resiliency 
•  
• Operations Management which 
control Capacity/resource 
planning, Equipment 
maintenance 
•  
A brief preview of the paper: (Ghosh, Ghosh, & Das, 2015) 
A framework to assist cloud service consumers while choosing and identifying the 
most applicable cloud provider which could assure the quality of the service provided, 
is proposed in this paper. The authors    
The authors consider these SLA parameters as the standard ones that are used with 
several cloud service SLAs:  Availability, Response time and Throughput 

84 
Table-A I- 17: Extracted SLA and SLO 
Adaptable Service Level Objective Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
SLAs 
SLOs 
• availability 
•  
• Accounting of services, 
•  
• IT continuity plans 
•  
• service development plans 
•  
• Terminologies 
•  
• Escalation plan 
•  
• Guidelines for priorities 
•  
• Responsibilities of both customer 
and company 
•  
• Data of both parties 
•  
• Service of both times 
•  
• Accomplishment penalties 
•  
• Signing an ID 
•  
• Termination reason 
•  
A brief preview of the paper:(Frey et al., 2013) 
 Most cloud providers offer a standard SLA for their customers. However, customers’ 
needs and requirements are distinct from each other most of the time. This issue is 
usually facing companies and individuals when trying to move their work or data to 
the cloud.  
In this paper, the authors are suggesting to create a special SLA for each customer 
respecting all related SLOs that are needed to evaluate and measure the service. They 
only mentioned the parts that each SLA should contain and present an USECASE 
about Availability.  
 
 

85 
Table-A I- 18: Extracted SLA and SLO 
An approach to identify and monitor SLA parameters for storage-as-a-service 
cloud delivery model. 
SLAs 
SLOs, (KPIs) Key Performance Indicators 
• Fault Tolerance 
• Data Replication 
• Data Mirroring 
•  Multipath Input and output IO 
• Performance 
• Type of Application 
• Maximum number of User Requests  
• Response Time 
• Transferring Bandwidth 
• Disaster Recovery 
• Recovery Point Objective (RPO) 
• Recovery Time Objective (RTO) 
• Security 
• Confidentiality 
• Integrity 
• Availability 
• Authentication 
• Authorization 
• Data Life Cycle 
Management (DLM) 
• Data Archival 
•  Accessibility of the Archived Data 
• Access Time 
• Governance 
• Geographic Location 
• Regulations 
• Availability 
A brief preview of the paper:(Ghosh & Ghosh, 2012) 
  Although consumers demand more assurance and guarantees to the provided service, 
most cloud providers nowadays are focusing on availability rather than other 
performance and management assurance. 
In this paper, the authors indicate the non-Trivial SLA parameters that are related to 
Storage-as-a-Service cloud, in addition to proposing a new SLA framework for  
monitoring and checking SLOs by using a third party. They also point out the 
limitations that most current SLAs in the market suffer from.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
ANNEX II 
 
 
SLA AND SLO PARAMETERS OCCURANCE PERCENTAGES  
In this annex II, we will present the tables that contain all the extracted SLA and SLO 
parameters that were used to identify the occurrence percentage for each SLA and SLO 
parameters. 
• 
SLA Parameters 
Table-A II- 1:SLA occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Availability 
response 
time 
Governance 
Security 
Termination 
of service 
Privacy 
Performance 
Throughput 
Roles & 
responsibilit
i
service 
capacity 
Elasticity or 
Scalability  
Disaster 
recovery 
1. 
ISO/IEC 19086-1 SLA 
Standard 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
M 
2. 
An approach to identify 
and 
monitor 
SLA 
parameters for storage-
as-a-service 
cloud 
delivery model 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
3. 
Service level agreement 
framework 
for 
e-
commerce cloud end-
user perspective 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
4. 
Monitoring 
and 
Management of Service 
Level Agreements in 
Cloud Computing 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
5. 
Adaptable Service Level 
Objective 
Agreement 
(A-SLO-A) for Cloud 
Services 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
6. 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. 
Encyclopedia of Cloud 
Computing 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
7. 
On 
Service 
Level 
Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud Computing Data 
Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
8. 
A 
comprehensive 
review on QoS measures 
for resource allocation 
in cloud environment 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
9. 
Quality of service and 
service level agreements 
for cloud environments: 
Issues and challenges 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 

88 
Reference Titles 
Availability 
response 
time 
Governance 
Security 
Termination 
of service 
Privacy 
Performance 
Throughput 
Roles & 
responsibilit
i
service 
capacity 
Elasticity or 
Scalability  
Disaster 
recovery 
10. A 
Framework 
for 
Negotiating 
Service 
Level 
Agreement 
of 
Cloud-based Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
11. Key 
performance 
indicators 
for 
cloud 
computing SLAs 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
12. SLA-Driven Monitoring 
of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components Using the 
MUSA Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
13. SMICloud: 
A 
Framework 
for 
Comparing and Ranking 
Cloud Services 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
14. Conceptual 
SLA 
framework 
for 
cloud 
computing 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
15. Low level Metrics to 
High 
level 
SLAs 
- 
LoM2HiS 
framework: 
Bridging 
the 
gap 
between 
monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
16. Continuous 
and 
Distributed Monitoring 
of Cloud SLAs Using 
S3LACC. 2017 IEEE 
Symposium on Service-
Oriented 
System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
17. A Systematic Review of 
Service 
Level 
Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." 
ACM 
Computing Surveys 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
18. Paputungan, I. V., A. F. 
M. Hani, M. F. Hassan 
and V. S. Asirvadam 
(2018). "Real-Time and 
Proactive 
SLA 
Renegotiation 
for 
a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE Systems Journal: 
1-13. 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
19. SelCSP: A Framework 
to Facilitate Selection of 
Cloud Service Providers 
M 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
Mentioning Percentage 
% 
68% 
57% 
15% 
68% 
21% 
26% 
52% 
26% 
15% 
10% 
26% 
21% 
 
Table-A II- 1:SLA occurrence percentages (Continued) 
 

89 
Table-A II- 2:SLA occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
backup and 
restore 
reliability 
Data 
location 
Portability 
Data 
deletion 
Fault 
Tolerance 
Usability 
Service 
renewals 
Service 
Credit 
Service 
violations 
Monitoring  
Service 
Excess Use 
1. 
ISO/IEC 19086-1 SLA 
Standard 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
2. 
An approach to identify 
and 
monitor 
SLA 
parameters for storage-
as-a-service 
cloud 
delivery model 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
3. 
Service level agreement 
framework 
for 
e-
commerce cloud end-
user perspective 
M 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
4. 
Monitoring 
and 
Management of Service 
Level Agreements in 
Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
5. 
Adaptable Service Level 
Objective 
Agreement 
(A-SLO-A) for Cloud 
Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
M* 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
6. 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. 
Encyclopedia of Cloud 
Computing 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
M 
M 
M 
N
M 
M 
7. 
On 
Service 
Level 
Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud Computing Data 
Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
8. 
A 
comprehensive 
review 
on 
QoS 
measures for resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud 
environment 
M 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
9. 
Quality of service and 
service level agreements 
for cloud environments: 
Issues and challenges 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
10. A 
Framework 
for 
Negotiating 
Service 
Level 
Agreement 
of 
Cloud-based Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
11. Key 
performance 
indicators 
for 
cloud 
computing SLAs 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
12. SLA-Driven Monitoring 
of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components Using the 
MUSA Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 

90 
Reference Titles 
backup and 
restore 
reliability 
Data 
location 
Portability 
Data 
deletion 
Fault 
Tolerance 
Usability 
Service 
renewals 
Service 
Credit 
Service 
violations 
Monitoring  
Service 
Excess Use 
13. SMICloud: 
A 
Framework 
for 
Comparing and Ranking 
Cloud Services 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
14. Conceptual 
SLA 
framework 
for 
cloud 
computing 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
15. Low level Metrics to 
High 
level 
SLAs 
- 
LoM2HiS 
framework: 
Bridging 
the 
gap 
between 
monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
16. Continuous 
and 
Distributed Monitoring 
of Cloud SLAs Using 
S3LACC. 2017 IEEE 
Symposium on Service-
Oriented 
System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
17. A Systematic Review of 
Service 
Level 
Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." 
ACM 
Computing Surveys 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
18. Paputungan, I. V., A. F. 
M. Hani, M. F. Hassan 
and V. S. Asirvadam 
(2018). "Real-Time and 
Proactive 
SLA 
Renegotiation 
for 
a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE Systems Journal: 
1-13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
19. SelCSP: A Framework 
to Facilitate Selection of 
Cloud Service Providers 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Mentioning Percentage 
% 
26
% 
36
% 
21
% 
26
% 
5% 
10
% 
26
% 
10
% 
10
% 
15
% 
1
0
% 
5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A II- 2:SLA occurrence percentages (Continued) 
 

91 
Table-A II- 3:SLA occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Cost and Finance 
Trust  
Confidentiality  
Storage  
Resiliency 
Compliance  
Data life cycle 
management 
law and jurisdiction 
Penalties  
Service 
guarantee/Assurance  
Service description 
Cloud Service 
Support 
ISO/IEC 
19086-1 
SLA 
Standard 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
An approach to identify and 
monitor SLA parameters for 
storage-as-a-service 
cloud 
delivery model 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Service 
level 
agreement 
framework for 
e-commerce 
cloud end-user perspective 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Monitoring and Management 
of Service Level Agreements 
in Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Adaptable 
Service 
Level 
Objective Agreement (A-SLO-
A) for Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. Encyclopedia of 
Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
On Service Level Agreement 
Assurance 
in 
Cloud 
Computing Data Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
A comprehensive review on 
QoS measures for resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud 
environment 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Quality of service and service 
level agreements for cloud 
environments: 
Issues 
and 
challenges 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
A Framework for Negotiating 
Service Level Agreement of 
Cloud-based Services 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
Key performance indicators for 
cloud computing SLAs 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
N
M 
NM 
SLA-Driven 
Monitoring 
of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components Using the MUSA 
Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
SMICloud: A Framework for 
Comparing and Ranking Cloud 
Services 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
NM 
Conceptual SLA framework 
for cloud computing 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
M 
Low level Metrics to High 
level 
SLAs 
- 
LoM2HiS 
framework: Bridging the gap 
between monitored metrics and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 

92 
Reference Titles 
Cost and Finance 
Trust  
Confidentiality  
Storage  
Resiliency 
Compliance  
Data life cycle 
management 
law and jurisdiction 
Penalties  
Service 
guarantee/Assurance  
Service description 
Cloud Service 
Support 
Continuous and Distributed 
Monitoring of Cloud SLAs 
Using S3LACC. 2017 IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Service-
Oriented System Engineering 
(SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
A 
Systematic 
Review 
of 
Service Level Management in 
the Cloud." ACM Computing 
Surveys 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Paputungan, I. V., A. F. M. 
Hani, M. F. Hassan and V. S. 
Asirvadam (2018). "Real-Time 
and 
Proactive 
SLA 
Renegotiation for a Cloud-
Based System." IEEE Systems 
Journal: 1-13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
SelCSP: 
A Framework to 
Facilitate Selection of Cloud 
Service Providers 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
NM 
Mentioning Percentage % 
21
% 
10
% 
10
% 
15
% 
10
% 
10
% 
10
% 
10
% 
15
% 
26
% 
1
0
% 
10
% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A II- 3:SLA occurrence percentages (Continued) 
 

93 
Table-A II- 4:SLA occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Accessibili
ty  
Error Rate  
Integrity 
Agility 
Bandwidth 
1. 
ISO/IEC 19086-1 SLA Standard 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
2. 
An approach to identify and monitor SLA 
parameters for storage-as-a-service cloud 
delivery model 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
3. 
Service level agreement framework for e-
commerce cloud end-user perspective 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
4. 
Monitoring and Management of Service 
Level Agreements in Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
5. 
Adaptable 
Service 
Level 
Objective 
Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
6. 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. 
Encyclopedia of Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
7. 
On Service Level Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud Computing Data Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
8. 
A comprehensive review on QoS measures 
for resource allocation in cloud environment 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
9. 
Quality 
of 
service 
and 
service 
level 
agreements for cloud environments: Issues 
and challenges 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
10. A Framework for Negotiating Service Level 
Agreement of Cloud-based Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
11. Key 
performance 
indicators 
for 
cloud 
computing SLAs 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
12. SLA-Driven 
Monitoring 
of 
Multi-cloud 
Application Components Using the MUSA 
Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
13. SMICloud: A Framework for Comparing and 
Ranking Cloud Services 
M 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
14. Conceptual SLA framework for cloud 
computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
15. Low level Metrics to High level SLAs - 
LoM2HiS framework: Bridging the gap 
between 
monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters in cloud environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
16. Continuous and Distributed Monitoring of 
Cloud SLAs Using S3LACC. 2017 IEEE 
Symposium on Service-Oriented System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
17. A Systematic Review of Service Level 
Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." 
ACM 
Computing Surveys 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 

94 
Reference Titles 
Accessibili
ty  
Error Rate  
Integrity 
Agility 
Bandwidth 
18. Paputungan, I. V., A. F. M. Hani, M. F. 
Hassan and V. S. Asirvadam (2018). "Real-
Time and Proactive SLA Renegotiation for a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE 
Systems 
Journal: 1-13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
19. SelCSP: A Framework to Facilitate Selection 
of Cloud Service Providers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Mentioning Percentage % 
10% 
5% 
10% 
5% 
15% 
 
M: Mentioned  
NM: Not Mentioned  
MSLA: Mentioned as SLA Parameter  
MSLO: Mentioned as SLO Parameter 
 
• Let (F) be then percentage of the frequency of SLA parameters. 
• Let M(n) be the number of how many times the parameter was mentioned.  
• Let A(n) be the total number of the analysed articles.  
 
F = M(n) X 100   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A(n) 
Table-A II- 4:SLA occurrence percentages (Continued) 
 

95 
 
• 
SLO parameters  
Table-A II- 5: SLO occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Response time  
Throughput  
Uptime  
Downtime  
Monitoring 
parameters  
Monitoring 
Mechanisms 
Accessibility 
Standards 
Accessibility  
Policies 
maximum Response 
Time Observation 
Response Time 
Mean 
Response Time 
Variance 
Cloud Service 
Bandwidth
ISO/IEC 
19086-1 
SLA 
Standard 
MS
LA 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
M 
 
An approach to identify 
and 
monitor 
SLA 
parameters for storage-as-
a-service cloud delivery 
model 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
 
Service level agreement 
framework for e-commerce 
cloud end-user perspective 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Monitoring 
and 
Management of Service 
Level 
Agreements 
in 
Cloud Computing 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Adaptable Service Level 
Objective Agreement (A-
SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. Encyclopedia 
of Cloud Computing 
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
On 
Service 
Level 
Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud 
Computing 
Data 
Centers 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A comprehensive review 
on 
QoS 
measures 
for 
resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud environment 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Quality of service and 
service level agreements 
for cloud environments: 
Issues and challenges 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A 
Framework 
for 
Negotiating Service Level 
Agreement of Cloud-based 
Services 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
 
M 
 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Key 
performance 
indicators 
for 
cloud 
computing SLAs 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
 
M 
 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
 
SLA-Driven Monitoring of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components 
Using 
the 
MUSA Framework 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SMICloud: A Framework 
for 
Comparing 
and 
Ranking Cloud Services 
MS
LO
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 

96 
Reference Titles 
Response time  
Throughput  
Uptime  
Downtime  
Monitoring 
parameters  
Monitoring 
Mechanisms 
Accessibility 
Standards 
Accessibility  
Policies 
maximum Response 
Time Observation 
Response Time 
Mean 
Response Time 
Variance 
Cloud Service 
Bandwidth
Conceptual 
SLA 
framework 
for 
cloud 
computing 
MS
LO
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Low level Metrics to High 
level SLAs - LoM2HiS 
framework: Bridging the 
gap 
between 
monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
MS
LA 
NM 
M 
 
M 
 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LO
MS
LA 
Continuous and Distributed 
Monitoring of Cloud SLAs 
Using 
S3LACC. 
2017 
IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Service-Oriented 
System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A Systematic Review of 
Service Level Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." 
ACM 
Computing Surveys 
M 
M 
M 
 
M 
 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
Paputungan, I. V., A. F. M. 
Hani, M. F. Hassan and V. 
S. 
Asirvadam 
(2018). 
"Real-Time and Proactive 
SLA Renegotiation for a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE Systems Journal: 1-
13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SelCSP: A Framework to 
Facilitate 
Selection 
of 
Cloud Service Providers 
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Mentioning Percentage % 
36% 
26% 
15% 
15% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
5% 
5% 
15
% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A II- 5: SLO occurrence percentages (Continued) 

97 
Table-A II- 6:SLO occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Limit of Available Cloud 
Service Resources 
Limit of Simultaneous 
Cloud Service 
Elasticity Speed 
 
Elasticity Precision 
Recovery Point 
Objective (RPO) 
Recovery Time 
Objective (RTO) 
Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Authentication 
Authorization 
Data archival 
ISO/IEC 
19086-1 
SLA 
Standard 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
An approach to identify and 
monitor SLA parameters 
for 
storage-as-a-service 
cloud delivery model 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
Service 
level 
agreement 
framework for e-commerce 
cloud end-user perspective 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Monitoring 
and 
Management 
of 
Service 
Level Agreements in Cloud 
Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Adaptable Service Level 
Objective Agreement (A-
SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. 
Encyclopedia 
of Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
On 
Service 
Level 
Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud 
Computing 
Data 
Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A comprehensive review on 
QoS measures for resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud 
environment 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Quality 
of 
service 
and 
service level agreements for 
cloud environments: Issues 
and challenges 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A 
Framework 
for 
Negotiating Service Level 
Agreement of Cloud-based 
Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Key performance indicators 
for cloud computing SLAs 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SLA-Driven Monitoring of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components 
Using 
the 
MUSA Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SMICloud: A Framework 
for Comparing and Ranking 
Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Conceptual 
SLA 
framework 
for 
cloud 
computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 

98 
Reference Titles 
Limit of Available Cloud 
Service Resources 
Limit of Simultaneous 
Cloud Service 
Elasticity Speed 
 
Elasticity Precision 
Recovery Point 
Objective (RPO) 
Recovery Time 
Objective (RTO) 
Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Authentication 
Authorization 
Data archival 
Low level Metrics to High 
level SLAs - LoM2HiS 
framework: Bridging the 
gap 
between 
monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Continuous and Distributed 
Monitoring of Cloud SLAs 
Using 
S3LACC. 
2017 
IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Service-Oriented 
System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A Systematic Review of 
Service Level Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." 
ACM 
Computing Surveys 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Paputungan, I. V., A. F. M. 
Hani, M. F. Hassan and V. 
S. 
Asirvadam 
(2018). 
"Real-Time and Proactive 
SLA Renegotiation for a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE Systems Journal: 1-
13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SelCSP: A Framework to 
Facilitate 
Selection 
of 
Cloud Service Providers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
MS
LA 
M 
M 
N
M 
Mentioning Percentage % 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
10% 
10% 
15% 
15% 
26% 
10% 
10% 
5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A II- 6: SLO occurrence percentages (Continued) 

99 
Table-A II- 7:SLO occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Data Deletion Process 
Data Deletion Notification  
Data Deletion Time  
Maximum number of User 
Requests 
Delay in end to end transaction 
Data Location Specification 
Capability 
packet loss 
MOS(Mean Opinion Score) 
 Law Enforcement Requests 
Failed Storage Transactions 
Number of Detected Attacks 
Accessibility of the Archived 
ISO/IEC 
19086-1 
SLA 
Standard 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
An approach to identify and 
monitor SLA parameters for 
storage-as-a-service 
cloud 
delivery model 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
Service 
level 
agreement 
framework for e-commerce 
cloud end-user perspective 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Monitoring and Management 
of Service Level Agreements 
in Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Adaptable 
Service 
Level 
Objective 
Agreement 
(A-
SLO-A) for Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. Encyclopedia of 
Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
On Service Level Agreement 
Assurance 
in 
Cloud 
Computing Data Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A comprehensive review on 
QoS measures for resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud 
environment 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Quality of service and service 
level agreements for cloud 
environments: 
Issues 
and 
challenges 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A Framework for Negotiating 
Service Level Agreement of 
Cloud-based Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Key performance indicators 
for cloud computing SLAs 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SLA-Driven Monitoring of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components 
Using 
the 
MUSA Framework 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
N
M 
SMICloud: A Framework for 
Comparing 
and 
Ranking 
Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Conceptual SLA framework 
for cloud computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Low level Metrics to High 
level 
SLAs 
- 
LoM2HiS 
framework: Bridging the gap 
between monitored metrics 
and SLA parameters in cloud 
environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 

100 
Reference Titles 
Data Deletion Process 
Data Deletion Notification  
Data Deletion Time  
Maximum number of User 
Requests 
Delay in end to end transaction 
Data Location Specification 
Capability 
packet loss 
MOS(Mean Opinion Score) 
 Law Enforcement Requests 
Failed Storage Transactions 
Number of Detected Attacks 
Accessibility of the Archived 
Continuous and Distributed 
Monitoring of Cloud SLAs 
Using S3LACC. 2017 IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Service-
Oriented System Engineering 
(SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
A Systematic 
Review of 
Service Level Management in 
the Cloud." ACM Computing 
Surveys 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Paputungan, I. V., A. F. M. 
Hani, M. F. Hassan and V. S. 
Asirvadam 
(2018). 
"Real-
Time and Proactive SLA 
Renegotiation for a Cloud-
Based 
System." 
IEEE 
Systems Journal: 1-13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
SelCSP: A Framework to 
Facilitate Selection of Cloud 
Service Providers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
N
M 
Mentioning Percentage % 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
10% 
5% 
10% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5
% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-A II- 7: SLO occurrence percentages (Continued) 

101 
Table-A II- 8:SLO occurrence percentages 
Reference Titles 
Data encryption 
Service disruption 
CPU capacity 
packet size 
Maximum number of outage per 
month 
Maximum duration per outage 
Maximum fraction of SLO 
violations allowed 
electricity prices 
Dollars 
Roles/Responsibilities 
Portability 
Reliability 
ISO/IEC 
19086-1 
SLA 
Standard 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
An approach to identify 
and 
monitor 
SLA 
parameters for storage-as-
a-service cloud delivery 
model 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Service level agreement 
framework 
for 
e-
commerce cloud end-user 
perspective 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Monitoring 
and 
Management of Service 
Level 
Agreements 
in 
Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Adaptable Service Level 
Objective Agreement (A-
SLO-A) 
for 
Cloud 
Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Cloud 
Service 
Level 
Agreement. Encyclopedia 
of Cloud Computing 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
On 
Service 
Level 
Agreement Assurance in 
Cloud Computing Data 
Centers 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
A comprehensive review 
on 
QoS 
measures 
for 
resource 
allocation 
in 
cloud environment 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Quality of service and 
service level agreements 
for cloud environments: 
Issues and challenges 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
A 
Framework 
for 
Negotiating Service Level 
Agreement of Cloud-based 
Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
Key 
performance 
indicators 
for 
cloud 
computing SLAs 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
SLA-Driven Monitoring of 
Multi-cloud 
Application 
Components 
Using 
the 
MUSA Framework 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
SMICloud: A Framework 
for 
Comparing 
and 
Ranking Cloud Services 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 

102 
Reference Titles 
Data encryption 
Service disruption 
CPU capacity 
packet size 
Maximum number of outage per 
month 
Maximum duration per outage 
Maximum fraction of SLO 
violations allowed 
electricity prices 
Dollars 
Roles/Responsibilities 
Portability 
Reliability 
Conceptual 
SLA 
framework 
for 
cloud 
computing 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Low level Metrics to High 
level SLAs - LoM2HiS 
framework: Bridging the 
gap between monitored 
metrics 
and 
SLA 
parameters 
in 
cloud 
environments 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Continuous 
and 
Distributed Monitoring of 
Cloud 
SLAs 
Using 
S3LACC. 
2017 
IEEE 
Symposium on Service-
Oriented 
System 
Engineering (SOSE) 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
A Systematic Review of 
Service 
Level 
Management 
in 
the 
Cloud." ACM Computing 
Surveys 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
M 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
Paputungan, I. V., A. F. 
M. Hani, M. F. Hassan and 
V. S. Asirvadam (2018). 
"Real-Time and Proactive 
SLA Renegotiation for a 
Cloud-Based 
System." 
IEEE Systems Journal: 1-
13. 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
SelCSP: A Framework to 
Facilitate 
Selection 
of 
Cloud Service Providers 
M 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
NM 
M 
NM 
NM 
Mentioning Percentage % 
15% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
10
% 
 
M: Mentioned  
NM: Not Mentioned  
MSLA: Mentioned as SLA Parameter  
MSLO: Mentioned as SLO Parameter 
• Let (F) be the percentage of the frequency of SLO parameters. 
• Let M(n) be the number of how many times the parameter was mentioned.  
• Let A(n) be the total  number of the analysed articles. 
 
F = M(n) X 100   
 
 
A(n) 
 
Table-A II- 8: SLO occurrence percentages (Continued) 

 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Alhamad, M., Dillon, T., & Chang, E. (2010). Conceptual SLA framework for cloud computing. 4th 
IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (pp. 606-610). doi: 
10.1109/DEST.2010.5610586.http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx5/5599959/5610579/05610586.pd
f?tp=&arnumber=5610586&isnumber=5610579 
 
Anithakumari, S., & K, C. (2015). Monitoring and Management of Service Level Agreements in 
Cloud Computing. 2015 International Conference on Cloud and Autonomic Computing (pp. 
204207).doi:10.1109/ICCAC.2015.28.http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7311005/7312127/0731
2156.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7312156&isnumber=7312127 
Bradford, C. ( July 25). 7 Most Infamous Cloud Security Breaches. Retrieved from 
https://blog.storagecraft.com/7-infamous-cloud-security-breaches/ 
 
Busalim, A. H., Hussin, A. R. C., & Ibrahim, A. (2013). Service level agreement framework for e-
commerce cloud end-user perspective. 2013 International Conference on Research and 
Innovation in Information Systems (ICRIIS), 27-28 Nov. 2013 (pp. 576-581). IEEE. doi: 
10.1109/ICRIIS.2013.6716773.http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICRIIS.2013.6716773http://ieeexplo
re.ieee.org/ielx7/6704979/6716676/06716773.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6716773&isnumber=6716
676 
 
Chana, I., & Singh, S. (2014). Quality of service and service level agreements for cloud 
environments: Issues and challenges. Cloud Computing (pp. 51-72). Springer.  
 
Dastjerdi, A. V., & Buyya, R. (2012). An autonomous reliability-aware negotiation strategy for cloud 
computing environments. Proceedings of the 2012 12th IEEE/ACM International Symposium 
on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (ccgrid 2012) (pp. 284-291). IEEE Computer Society.  
 
De Benedictis, A., Rak, M., Turtur, M., & Villano, U. (2015). REST-based SLA management for 
cloud applications. 2015 24th IEEE International Conference on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructures for Collaborative Enterprises, WETICE 2015, June 15, 2015 - June 17, 2015 
(pp. 
93-98). 
Institute 
of 
Electrical 
and 
Electronics 
Engineers 
Inc. 
doi: 
10.1109/WETICE.2015.36.http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WETICE.2015.36http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/ielx7/7194241/7194298/07194337.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7194337&isnumber=7194298 
 
Djemame, K., Armstrong, D., Guitart, J., & Macias, M. (2016). A Risk Assessment Framework for 
Cloud Computing. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 4(3), 265-278. doi: 
10.1109/TCC.2014.2344653http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/6245519/7558283/06868985.pdf?
tp=&arnumber=6868985&isnumber=7558283 
 
El-Awadi, R., & Abu-Rizka, M. (2015). A Framework for Negotiating Service Level Agreement of 
Cloud-based 
Services. 
Procedia 
Computer 
Science, 
65, 
940-949. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.066. Repéré à http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.066 

104 
 
Emeakaroha, V. C., Brandic, I., Maurer, M., & Dustdar, S. (2010). Low level Metrics to High level 
SLAs - LoM2HiS framework: Bridging the gap between monitored metrics and SLA 
parameters in cloud environments. Dans 2010 International Conference on High 
Performance Computing & Simulation (pp. 48-54). doi: 10.1109/HPCS.2010.5547150 
 
Faniyi, F., & Bahsoon, R. (2015). A Systematic Review of Service Level Management in the Cloud. 
ACM 
Computing 
Surveys, 
48(3), 
43 
(27 
pp.). 
doi: 
10.1145/2843890. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2843890 
 
Frey, S., Luthje, C., Teckelmann, R., & Reich, C. (2013). Adaptable Service Level Objective 
Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Services. CLOSER 2013. 3rd International Conference on 
Cloud Computing and Service Science, 8-10 May 2013 (pp. 457-462). INSTICC Press.  
 
Frey, S., Reich, C., & Lüthje, C. (2013). Key performance indicators for cloud computing SLAs. 
Dans The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence, EMERGING 
(pp. 60-64).  
 
Garg, S. K., Versteeg, S., & Buyya, R. (2011). SMICloud: A Framework for Comparing and Ranking 
Cloud Services. 2011 Fourth IEEE International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing 
(pp.210218).doi:10.1109/UCC.2011.36.http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx5/6123165/6123457/06
123500.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6123500&isnumber=6123457 
 
Ghosh, N., & Ghosh, S. K. (2012). An approach to identify and monitor SLA parameters for storage-
as-a-service cloud delivery model. Dans 2012 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps 
2012), 3-7 Dec. 2012 (pp. 724-729). IEEE. doi: 10.1109/GLOCOMW.2012.6477664. Repéré 
à http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOMW.2012.6477664 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/6470041/6477486/06477664.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6477664&is
number=6477486 
 
Ghosh, N., Ghosh, S. K., & Das, S. K. (2015). SelCSP: A Framework to Facilitate Selection of Cloud 
Service Providers. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 3(1), 66-79. doi: 
10.1109/TCC.2014.2328578. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/6245519/7027147/06858002.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6858002&is
number=7027147 
 
 
Ghumman, W. A. (2014). Automation of the SLA Life Cycle in Cloud Computing. Dans Service-
Oriented Computing - ICSOC 2013 Workshops. CCSA, CSB, PASCEB, SWESE, WESOA, and 
PhD Symposium, 2-5 Dec. 2013 (pp. 557-562). Springer International Publishing. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-06859-6_51. Repéré à http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06859-6_51 
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-06859-6_51.pdf 
 

105 
Ghumman, W. A., & Schill, A. (2017a). Continuous and Distributed Monitoring of Cloud SLAs 
Using S3LACC. Dans 2017 IEEE Symposium on Service-Oriented System Engineering 
(SOSE) 
(pp. 
114-119). 
doi: 
10.1109/SOSE.2017.23. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7940188/7943274/07943300.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7943300&is
number=7943274 
 
Ghumman, W. A., & Schill, A. (2017b). SLA Life Cycle Automation and Management for Cloud 
Services. Dans Computer Networks. 24th International Conference, CN 2017, 20-23 June 
2017 (pp. 305-318). Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-59767-6_25. 
Repéré à http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59767-6_25 
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-59767-6_25.pdf 
 
ISO/IEC 19086-1, Information technology – Cloud computing – Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
framework and technology – Part 1: Overview and concepts International Organization for 
Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2016. 
 
ISO/IEC 20000, Information technology – Service management – Service management system 
requirements, Geneva, Switzerland, 2015. 
 
Labidi, T., Mtibaa, A., Gaaloul, W., Tata, S., & Gargouri, F. (2017). Cloud SLA Modeling and 
Monitoring. Dans 2017 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing (SCC) (pp. 
338-345). 
doi: 
10.1109/SCC.2017.50. 
Repéré 
à 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/8031413/8034950/08035003.pdf?tp=&arnumber=8035003&i
snumber=8034950 
Latouf, J. (2016, June 18). What are the most famous or biggest cloud security breaches      
events /incidents?. Retrieved from http://www.quora.com/profile/Joseph-Latouf 
 
Maarouf, A., Marzouk, A., & Haqiq, A. (2016). Practical modeling of the SLA life cycle in Cloud 
Computing. Dans 15th International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and 
Applications, ISDA 2015, December 14, 2015 - December 16, 2015 (Vol. 2016-June, pp. 52-
58). 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society. 
doi: 
10.1109/ISDA.2015.7489170. 
Repéré 
à 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISDA.2015.7489170 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7484413/7489153/07489170.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7489170&is
number=7489153 
 
Mirobi, G. J., & Arockiam, L. (2015). Service Level Agreement in cloud computing: An overview. 
Dans 2015 International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Communication and 
Computational 
Technologies 
(ICCICCT) 
(pp. 
753-758). 
doi: 
10.1109/ICCICCT.2015.7475380. 
Repéré 
à 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7469254/7475237/07475380.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7475380&i
snumber=7475237 
 
Morin, J. H., Aubert, J., & Gateau, B. (2012). Towards Cloud Computing SLA Risk Management: 
Issues and Challenges. Dans 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 

106 
(pp. 
5509-5514). 
doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2012.602. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx5/6148328/6148595/06149562.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6149562&is
number=6148595 
 
Oriol, M., Marco, J., & Franch, X. (2014). Quality models for web services: A systematic mapping. 
Information and software technology, 56(10), 1167-1182.  
 
Pan, L. (2011). Towards a ramework for automated service negotiation in cloud computing. Dans 
2011 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing and Intelligence Systems (pp. 364-
367). 
doi: 
10.1109/CCIS.2011.6045091. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx5/6034549/6045020/06045091.pdf?tp=&arnumber=6045091&is
number=6045020 
 
Paputungan, I. V., Hani, A. F. M., Hassan, M. F., & Asirvadam, V. S. (2018). Real-Time and 
Proactive SLA Renegotiation for a Cloud-Based System. IEEE Systems Journal, 1-13. doi: 
10.1109/JSYST.2018.2805293. 
Repéré 
à 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/4267003/4357939/08325545.pdf?tp=&arnumber=8325545&i
snumber=4357939 
 
Paschke, A., & Schnappinger-Gerull, E. (2006). A Categorization Scheme for SLA Metrics. Service 
Oriented Electronic Commerce, 80(25-40), 14.  
 
Patel, P., Ranabahu, A. H., & Sheth, A. P. (2009). Service level agreement in cloud computing.  
 
Pittl, B., Mach, W., & Schikuta, E. (2016). A classification of autonomous bilateral cloud SLA 
negotiation strategies. Dans Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Information 
Integration and Web-based Applications and Services (pp. 379-388). ACM.  
 
Rady, M. (2012). Parameters for service level agreements generation in cloud computing. Dans 
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (pp. 13-22). Springer.  
 
Rios, E., Mallouli, W., Rak, M., Casola, V., & Ortiz, A. M. (2016). SLA-Driven Monitoring of Multi-
cloud Application Components Using the MUSA Framework. Dans 2016 IEEE 36th 
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW) (pp. 55-
60). 
doi: 
10.1109/ICDCSW.2016.29. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7756174/7756178/07756209.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7756209&is
number=7756178 
 
 
 

107 
Rojas, M. A. T., Gonzalez, N. M., Sbampato, F. V., Redigolo, F. F., Carvalho, T., Ullah, K. W., . . . 
Ahmed, A. S. (2016). A framework to orchestrate security SLA lifecycle in cloud computing. 
Dans 11th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies, CISTI 2016, June 
15, 2016 - June 18, 2016 (Vol. 2016-July). IEEE Computer Society. doi: 
10.1109/CISTI.2016.7521372. Repéré à http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CISTI.2016.7521372 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7511893/7521364/07521372.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7521372&is
number=7521364 
 
San, M., & Irena, B. (2016). Cloud Service Level Agreement. Dans Encyclopedia of Cloud 
Computing (pp. 744). Wiley-IEEE Press. doi: 10.1002/9781118821930.ch36. Repéré à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?arnumber=7493779 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118821930.ch36/pdf 
 
Shiny, J. J., & Vignesh, S. (2017). A comprehensive review on QoS measures for resource allocation 
in cloud environment. Dans 2016 Eighth International Conference on Advanced Computing 
(ICoAC) 
(pp. 
157-164). 
doi: 
10.1109/ICoAC.2017.7951762. 
Repéré 
à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7938015/7951734/07951762.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7951762&is
number=7951734 
 
Suryn, W. (2014). Software quality engineering: a practitioner's approach. John Wiley & Sons.  
 
Terfas, H., Suryn, W., Roy, J., & Eftekhar, S. M. (2018). Extending ISO/IEC 19086 Cloud 
Computing SLA standards to support cloud service users with the SLA negotiation process. 
SQM XXVI, 127.  
 
Torrez Rojas, M. A., Gonzalez, N. M., Sbampato, F., Redigolo, F., De Brito Carvalho, T. C. M., 
Nguyen, K. K., & Cheriet, M. (2015). Inclusion of security requirements in SLA lifecycle 
management for cloud computing. Dans 2nd International Workshop on Evolving Security 
and Privacy Requirements Engineering, ESPRE 2015, August 25, 2015 (pp. 7-12). Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. doi: 10.1109/ESPRE.2015.7330161. Repéré à 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ESPRE.2015.7330161 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7325165/7330155/07330161.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7330161&is
number=7330155 
 
 
Valentic, B. (2013, July). Business Relationship Management, Service Level Management… Too 
much management? Retrieved from 
https://advisera.com/20000academy/blog/2013/07/15/business-relationship-management-
service-level-management-much-management/?icn=free-blog-20000&ici=top-service-level-
management-process-txt 
 
Venticinque, S., Aversa, R., Di Martino, B., Rak, M., & Petcu, D. (2010). A cloud agency for SLA 
negotiation and management. Dans European Conference on Parallel Processing (pp. 587-
594). Springer.  

108 
Wegmann, A., Regev, G., Garret, G.-A., & Maréchal, F. (2008). Specifying services for ITIL service 
management. Dans 2008 International Workshop on Service-Oriented Computing: 
Consequences for Engineering Requirements (pp. 8-14). IEEE. 
 
 
Yadranjiaghdam, B., Hotwani, K., & Tabrizi, N. (2016). A Risk Evaluation Framework for Service 
Level Agreements. Dans 2016 IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information 
Technology 
(CIT) 
(pp. 
681-685). 
doi: 
10.1109/CIT.2016.93. 
Repéré 
à 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7875313/7876293/07876406.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7876406&i
snumber=7876293 
 
 
Zainelabden, A. A., Ibrahim, A., Kliazovich, D., & Bouvry, P. (2016). On Service Level Agreement 
Assurance in Cloud Computing Data Centers. Dans 2016 IEEE 9th International Conference 
on Cloud Computing (CLOUD) (pp. 921-926). doi: 10.1109/CLOUD.2016.0137. Repéré à 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/7819578/7820017/07820374.pdf?tp=&arnumber=7820374&is
number=7820017 
 
 
 Zitek, N. (2015, July). SLAs, OLAs and UCs in ITIL and ISO 20000. Retrieved from 
https://advisera.com/20000academy/knowledgebase/slas-olas-ucs-itil-iso-20000/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
