Computationally-Eﬃcient Decomposition Heuristic for the Static
Traﬃc Assignment Problem
Venktesh Pandeya and Priyadarshan N. Patilb
aAssistant Professor, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, North
Carolina, USA; bGraduate Research Assistant, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas,
USA
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled June 28, 2022
ABSTRACT
Applications such as megaregional planning require eﬃcient methods for solving
traﬃc assignment problems (TAPs) on large-scale networks. We propose a decom-
position heuristic that generates approximate TAP solutions by partitioning the
complete network into subnetworks which are solved in parallel and use an iterative-
reﬁnement algorithm for improving the network partitions. A novel network transfor-
mation and three-stage algorithm are also proposed to solve a constrained shortest
path problem as a subproblem of the heuristic. Experiments on various networks
show that the heuristic can generate 15.1–67.8% computational savings in ﬁnding
solutions with initial relative gap of 0.02. The performance beneﬁts of the proposed
heuristic when warmstarting standard TAP algorithms are demonstrated with an
average computational savings of 10–35% over a TAP solver without warmstarting.
KEYWORDS
Traﬃc assignment, Spatial decomposition, Parallel schemes for traﬃc assignment,
Statewide modeling, Partitioning algorithms
1.
Introduction
Traﬃc assignment problems (TAPs), which assign vehicles to network routes as the last
step of the four-step planning process, are well studied. The classical time-independent
or static version of TAP takes as input a demand matrix (number of travelers going
from one zone to the other) and the network supply side characteristics (transporta-
tion network and travel-time functions on links as a function of number of travelers),
and solves for ﬂows on network links such that the Wardrop equilibrium condition is
satisﬁed. Static TAP is used ubiquitously for transportation planning purposes such
as select link analysis, scenario comparison, and ﬂow assignment in the four-step plan-
ning process. With advances in computing power, several eﬃcient algorithms have
been proposed to solve the static TAP. This research is motivated by the need to
improve the computational eﬃciency of solving TAPs on large-scale networks.
Corresponding Author: Venktesh Pandey. Email: vpandey@ncat.edu
arXiv:2206.12496v1  [math.OC]  24 Jun 2022

The ﬁrst motivation is planning for megaregions. Megaregions cross state and politi-
cal boundaries and are characterized by trade and infrastructural connections across
a much larger area. For example, the north-eastern megaregion spans the states of
Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New
Jersey and Virginia, and contains as much as 17% of the current US population. With
increasing intra-megaregion trade and traﬃc, current statewide or citywide models are
not appropriate for the megaregion scale creating a need for computationally-eﬃcient
TAP algorithms for these networks.
The second motivation is rooted in applications that require multiple TAP solutions,
such as scenario analysis and network design problems(Gokalp, Patil, and Boyles 2021;
Patil, Walthall, and Boyles 2022). These applications can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from
faster TAP algorithms. Furthermore, for such applications we often desire only an
approximate solution to the TAP, characterized by a higher relative gap value than an
optimal solution at which the relative gap is zero (Patriksson 2015; Patil, Ross, and
Boyles 2021).
Lately, network decomposition algorithms have been proposed for TAP (Jafari,
Pandey, and Boyles 2017; Raadsen 2018). These algorithms decompose a large network
into subnetworks which can be solved in parallel and oﬀer a potential to outperform
algorithms that solve TAP on the full network (referred to as centralized algorithms)
by making use of multiple machine cores. Furthermore, decentralized computations
also oﬀer robustness against centralized machine failures (Jafari 2017). However, scal-
ing these algorithms for more than two network partitions and handling subnetwork
interactions is challenging. In this article, we propose a decomposition-based heuristic
that generates approximate solutions to the TAP in faster computation time than the
centralized algorithms.
The contributions of this research include the following: (a) we propose a novel net-
work transformation and three-stage algorithm to solve a restricted shortest path (SP)
problem as a subproblem of the heuristic, (b) we propose partitioning algorithms that
work for general networks without obvious geographical partitions (such as a natural
partition created by a river) and discuss their impacts on solving TAP for large scale
networks, which is an improvement over prior work (Yahia, Pandey, and Boyles 2018),
and (c) we propose an iterative reﬁnement approach for network partitioning that im-
proves the computational eﬃciency of the heuristic. The rest of the article is organized
as follows. Section 2 presents the formulation and background for TAP and its solution
methods. Sections 3 and 4 present the methodology and the heuristic, and discuss the
implementation detail. Section 5 reports experimental results and ﬁndings on diﬀerent
large-scale test networks. Lastly, Section 6 concludes the article and presents potential
future extensions.
2.
Formulation and Literature Review
This section provides the convex programming formulation for static TAP and then
discusses advances in TAP solution methods.
2

2.1.
Formulation
Let G = (N, A) be the directed network deﬁned by set of nodes N and set of arcs A.
For each node i ∈N, let Γi denotes the set of all outgoing arcs and Γ−1
i
denote the set
of all incoming arcs. A subset of N, denoted by Z, indicates the set of centroids where
demand originates or terminates. The demand from origin zone r to destination zone
s is denoted by drs, and the origin-destination (OD) pair is denoted by < r, s >. The
set of all demand values is recorded in an OD matrix D, deﬁned as D = {drs | r ∈
Z, s ∈Z}. Sets G and D are inputs for static TAP.
The output of static TAP is the steady state ﬂow xij on each link (i, j) ∈A, starting
at node i and terminating at node j. The travel times on each link as a function
of ﬂow is given by a link performance function, which is commonly assumed to be
an increasing and a convex function of link ﬂow. One commonly used function is the
Bureau of Public Roads equation (United States Bureau of Public Roads 1964), stated
as follows:
tij(xij) = t0
ij(1 + α(xij/uij)β),
(1)
where t0
ij is the free-ﬂow travel time (i.e., the travel time on the link with zero conges-
tion), uij is the capacity of the link, and α and β are shape parameters calibrated to
the link. If calibration is not possible, the default values are α = 0.15 and β = 4.
Let π denote a path, and hπ denote the number of drivers who choose the path. The
set of all paths connecting zones r and s is denoted by Πrs. Link and path ﬂows can
be tied together using the following equation:
xij =
X
r∈Z
X
s∈Z
X
π∈Πrs
δπ
ijhπ,
where δπ
ij is an indicator variable which takes the value 1 if link (i, j) is used by path
π, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, path travel times cπ are deﬁned as the sum of travel
times of the links included on the path. Thus,
cπ =
X
(i,j)∈A
δπ
ijtij.
Traﬃc equilibrium is a steady state of the network where no driver can get an ad-
vantage by unilaterally changing their decision. More formally, the principle of user
equilibrium states “Every used route connecting an origin and destination has equal
and minimal travel cost”. This is also known as Wardrop’s ﬁrst principle (Wardrop and
Whitehead 1952). This principle makes a few assumptions including (a) the assump-
tion of driver’s rationality where each driver wants to choose the path between their
origin and their destination with the least travel cost, and (b) the assumption of per-
fect information, where drivers have perfect knowledge of link travel times. With these
assumptions, the TAP for user equilibrium can be formulated as a convex program as
3

follows:
min
x,h
X
(i,j)∈A
Z xij
0
tij(x)dx
(2a)
subject to:
xij =
X
π∈Π:(i,j)∈π
hπ
∀(i, j) ∈A
(2b)
X
π∈Πrs
hπ = drs
∀(r, s) ∈Z2
(2c)
hπ ≥0
∀π ∈Π
(2d)
This convex program formulation was ﬁrst proposed by Martin Beckmann (Beckmann,
McGuire, and Winsten 1956). The constraints denote the relation between link ﬂows
and path ﬂows (Equation (2b)), ﬂow conservation across all paths for each OD pair
(Equation (2c)), and non-negativity of path ﬂows (Equation (2d)). Assuming that
link travel time functions are continuous guarantees existence of a solution and that
these functions are strictly increasing guarantees uniqueness for the convex program.
More details on the convex program formulation in Equation (2) and its variants can
be found in standard texts such as Patriksson (2015) and Boyles, Lownes, and Un-
nikrishnan (2020). This formulation has allowed for conventional convex programming
approaches to be applied to TAP, as well as development of specialized TAP solution
algorithms that are discussed next.
2.2.
TAP solution methods
Specialized iterative methods have been developed to solve the convex program in
Equation (2) eﬃciently by exploiting properties of TAP. These methods broadly fall
into three classes: link-based, path-based and origin-based. Historically, link-based
algorithms were the ﬁrst to be studied, owing to low memory requirements. These
methods update the link ﬂow vector in order to strictly reduce the objective function.
The method of successive averages algorithm (Powell and Sheﬃ1982) and Frank-Wolfe
(FW) algorithm (Frank and Wolfe 1956; LeBlanc, Morlok, and Pierskalla 1975) are
the two most widely used link based algorithms. Researchers have tried to improve
upon these methods by modifying the search direction (Patriksson 2015; Daneva and
Lindberg 2003; Mitradjieva and Lindberg 2013; Holmgren and Lindberg 2014). Link-
based methods are easy to implement but are slow and ineﬃcient for larger instances.
Additionally, the solution does not include path information.
Path-based methods address these issues by tracking used path sets, taking advan-
tage of increased computing power. For each OD pair, the algorithms track a used
path set and equilibrate ﬂows within the used path set. Two widely known algorithms
are gradient projection (Jayakrishnan et al. 1994) and projected gradient (Florian,
Constantin, and Florian 2009). Some other algorithms in this class are disaggre-
gate simplicial decomposition algorithm (Larsson and Patriksson 1992), path based
FW (Chen, Jayakrishnan, and Tsai 2002), conjugate gradient projection (Lee, Nie,
and Chen 2003), slope-based methods (Kumar and Peeta 2010, 2014), and greedy
path-based approach (Xie, Nie, and Liu 2018). However, path-based algorithms have
4

signiﬁcant redundancy in path storage, due to overlap in multiple paths for an OD
pair.
This led to development of origin-based methods which keep track of a set of bushes (a
connected acyclic subnetwork rooted at an origin). Knowing the bush structure allows
for easy decomposition into path ﬂows. Dial’s Algorithm B (Dial 2006) allows for ﬂow
equilibration only between the shortest and longest path in a bush, while Bar-gera’s
OBA (Bar-Gera 2002) shifts ﬂows on multiple paths in a bush. Nie (2010) compares
multiple Newton-type bush-based algorithms. Bar-Gera (2010) proposes TAPAS, an
algorithm using ﬂow shifts between paired alternative segments, rather than ﬂow shifts
over entire paths. Some other algorithms in this space are local user equilibrium algo-
rithm (Gentile 2014) and i-TAPAS (Xie and Xie 2016).
These approaches solve TAP for the entire network. With nonlinear computational
complexity for TAP, decomposing and solving multiple smaller problems can lead to
better performance. Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017) decompose the network into
smaller subnetworks and alternate solving the master network (using network con-
tractions) and subnetworks till convergence. Raadsen (2018) focuses on creating an
alternate lossless representation of the network and performing computational opti-
mization on this representation using an integrated disaggregation-aggregation frame-
work. In this article, we build oﬀthe geoegraphical-decomposition model proposed in
Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017).
Computational improvements have also been sought by parallelization of sub-routines
such as shortest path subroutines (Kumar and Singh 1991; Florian and Gendreau
2001), or OD pair equilibration in Gradient projection (Chen et al. 2020). Usage
of contraction hierarchies (Buchhold, Sanders, and Wagner 2018, 2019) or eﬃcient
shortest path methods (Ziliaskopoulos, Kotzinos, and Mahmassani 1997) have also
been proposed. Each of these eﬃciencies can be implemented as a complementary
dimension to the geographical partitioning implemented in our proposed heuristic.
One last consideration is the usage of ‘warm-starting’ to reduce computation time.
Warm-starting has seen some prior usage for traﬃc assignment algorithms. First sug-
gested by Dial (Dial 1999), a feasible traﬃc assignment solution was proposed as a
substitute to shortest path assignment. Dial (2006) also found that warm-starting with
a TAP solution reduced computation time for a slightly modiﬁed trip table. Peeta, Ku-
mar, and Sharma (2011) show the beneﬁts of warm-starting TAP algorithms on mul-
tiple networks, observing faster convergence. The beneﬁts of warm-starting dynamic
TAP using static TAP solutions have also been observed in multiple studies (Levin
et al. 2011; Nezamuddin 2011; Levin, Boyles, and Nezamuddin 2015).
The common motivation for these methods has been the reduction of computa-
tion time. The improvements are benchmarked on large-scale networks, including
megaregions. In this article, we contribute towards this motivation by developing
decomposition-based algorithms (as introduced in Section 3). We also exploit the use-
fulness of the proposed heuristic to generate solutions for eﬃciently warmstarting TAP,
as discussed later.
2.3.
Convergence of TAP solution algorithms
Traﬃc assignment algorithms provide link ﬂows (and in some cases, path ﬂows) as
output. Relevant metrics such as total system travel time (TSTT) are calculated from
5

the link ﬂows. Given the current link ﬂow vector x, TSTT is deﬁned as the sum of
travel times across all travelers and is calculated using the following formula:
TSTT(x) =
X
(i,j)∈A
tij(xij)xij.
(3)
Traﬃc assignment algorithms terminate based on a predetermined convergence cri-
terion. The convergence criterion indicates proximity to the optimal solution. There
are various criteria that are used in practice, such as relative gap, average excess cost
or average/total link reduced cost (Bar-Gera 2010). Patil, Ross, and Boyles (2021)
provide some guidance on appropriate level of relative gap values required for various
network metrics to stabilize. There are several deﬁnitions of relative gap in common
practice; we use the following one. Let κrs(x) denote the travel time on the shortest
path from origin r to destination s using the link travel times corresponding to x. The
shortest path travel time (SPTT) equals TSTT if all vehicles were on shortest paths
(as required by the user equilibrium condition):
SPTT(x) =
X
<r,s>∈Z2
κrs(x)drs.
(4)
The relative gap (RG) can then be deﬁned as:
gap(x) = TSTT(x) −SPTT(x)
(5)
RG(x) =
gap(x)
SPTT(x) = TSTT(x)
SPTT(x) −1 .
(6)
3.
Methodology
3.1.
DSTAP vs DSTAP-Heuristic
Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017) proposed a decomposition algorithm for static traﬃc
assignment problem (DSTAP) where a full network is replaced by three components:
(a) geographically separate regions called subnetworks, (b) a master network that
retains the origins, destinations, and boundary nodes in each subnetwork, and (c)
artiﬁcial links that approximate the interactions between connecting nodes where the
link parameters are estimated using TAP sensitivity analysis. Figure 1(b) shows the
DSTAP master network and subnetworks obtained after decomposing the full network
in Figure 1(a). Artiﬁcial links in the master network approximate interactions within a
subnetwork between an origin/destination node and a boundary node of a subnetwork.
On the other hand, artiﬁcial links for subnetworks approximate the paths connecting
boundary nodes of a subnetwork that traverse other subnetworks.
6

Figure 1.: (a) Full network, (b) DSTAP networks, and (c) DSTAP-Heuristic networks
The DSTAP procedure is shown in Algorithm 1. In each DSTAP iteration for the
network shown in Figure 1(b), the master network TAP is solved ﬁrst where demand
between OD pairs 1 →8 and 1 →11 are loaded on paths in the master network.
Next, the ﬂows on each master network artiﬁcial link is used to update the demand
on subnetworks; for example, ﬂow obtained on artiﬁcial link (1, 5) is added to the
demand between OD pair [1,5] in the left subnetwork. Next, the subnetworks are
solved in parallel, and the obtained solution is used to ﬁnd the updated artiﬁcial link
parameters for the next iteration using a bush-based sensitivity analysis (Jafari and
Boyles 2016). Last, the ﬂows on each used path between an OD pair in the master
network and subnetworks are mapped to the full network by identifying corresponding
paths that replace an artiﬁcial link. For example, the ﬂow on path 1 →5 →7 →11
will be mapped to the full network by concatenating the paths connecting 1 and 5 in
subnetwork 1, with link (5, 7), followed by paths connecting 7 and 11 in subnetwork
2. Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017) showed that the DSTAP iterative procedure is
guaranteed to converge to the optimal TAP solution with additional computational
savings for large-scale networks.
Algorithm 1 DSTAP procedure for solving TAP (Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles 2017)
Inputs: network ﬁle, trips ﬁle, networks partitions as subnetworks
Step 1: Set up — validate partitions for connectivity, create master networks and
subnetworks, generate master network artiﬁcial links and corresponding artiﬁcial
origin-destination (OD) pairs inside subnetworks.
Step 2: Optimize
while relative gap on the full network > threshold AND iteration number <
desired maximum iterations do
Solve master network to a desired gap
Update the demand on subnetwork artiﬁcial OD pairs
Solve the subnetworks in parallel with the updated demand to a desired gap
Update the parameters for master network artiﬁcial links and subnetwork ar-
tiﬁcial links using TAP sensitivity analysis
Outputs: Final full network gap and link ﬂows/costs
Implementing DSTAP for megaregions and other large-scale networks is advantageous
as it distributes the computations over subnetworks, which can each be solved in
parallel. However, the number of artiﬁcial links generated can pose a computational
7

bottleneck. In the Austin network tested by Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017), there
were approximately 74000 artiﬁcial links in the master network and 3000 artiﬁcial
links across the subnetworks (more details are presented in Table 1).
As observed, the number of master network artiﬁcial links is signiﬁcantly high and one
might expect their inclusion to pose a computational burden for DSTAP. However, that
is not the case. This is because, for the case with 2 subnetworks, the used paths in the
master network connecting an OD pair only includes 2 artiﬁcial links: one connecting
origin to the boundary node of origin’s subnetwork, and the one connecting boundary
node of destination’s subnetwork to the destination. Additionally, artiﬁcial links in
the master network are essential in modeling the interaction between interior and
boundary nodes. Thus, master network artiﬁcial links are not a primary challenge.
On the other hand, subnetwork artiﬁcial links (SALs) such as (dashed) links (5,6) and
(7,8) in subnetworks in Figure 1(b), which represent all the paths connecting the two
nodes completely outside the given subnetwork, are particularly challenging due to
three reasons.
First, at any DSTAP iteration, a path replacing an SAL may itself include SALs in
other subnetwork, which adds an unnecessary complexity to the calculation of sensi-
tivity parameters and mapping of ﬂow on the full network. For example, consider the
network shown in Figure 2(a) where the used paths at equilibrium connecting nodes
a and d in subnetwork 1 are shown. If we replace interactions outside the subnetwork
with artiﬁcial links, then artiﬁcial link (a, d) is modeled by conducting sensitivity
analysis of OD pair (e, h) in subnetwork 2, whose paths include another artiﬁcial link
(f, g). This pattern where a SAL may replace other (possibly multiple) SALs create
computational issues of SAL parameters’ from one iteration to the next and also while
mapping ﬂow from SALs to full network paths.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.: Issue 1 where a SAL (a,d) in subnetwork 1 includes a path that includes
another SAL (f, g) in subnetwork 2 creating computational burden with ﬂow mapping
and computing SAL parameters using sensitivity analysis.
Second, as discussed in Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017), modeling SALs for more
than two subnetworks requires approximating a part of the master network in all other
subnetworks, which adds additional computational burden by increasing the number
of links in each subnetwork. For example, in the ﬁgure shown below, we observe that
to model outside-the-network interactions between nodes a1 and a2 in subnetwork 1,
8

we require including 12 extra links (with regional and master-network artiﬁcial links
included), which can make the process of solving each subnetwork cumbersome.
𝑐!
𝑐"
𝑎!
𝑎"
𝑐#
𝑏$
𝑏#
𝑏!
𝑏"
Subnetwork 1
Subnetwork 2
Subnetwork 3
(a)
𝑐!
𝑐"
𝑎!
𝑎"
𝑐#
𝑏$
𝑏#
𝑏!
𝑏"
Subnetwork 1
(b)
Figure 3.: Issue 2 with subnetwork artiﬁcial links where if more than two partitions
are considered (part (a)), then capturing interactions outside of a subnetwork requires
handling multiple additional links and nodes for every pair of boundary nodes (as
shown in (b)).
Last, there is an additional computation burden posed by the issue when a boundary
node in a subnetwork connects to multiple boundary nodes of another subnetwork. For
example, for the network in Figure 4 modeling the associated OD pair in subnetwork
2 for the SAL (a, d) in subnetwork 1 requires modeling extra nodes a and d and
regional links as part of subnetwork 2, which increases the computational complexity
of DSTAP.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.: Issue 3 where modeling the associated OD pair in subnetwork 2 for the SAL
(a, d) in subnetwork 1 requires modeling extra nodes a and d and regional links as
part of subnetwork 2.
Given that the objective of DSTAP is to improve the computational eﬃciency of solv-
ing the TAP by creating geographically separable partitions, the three issues created
due to SALs create computational bottlenecks. In this research, we modify DSTAP by
simply dropping the SALs (networks in Figure 1(c)). Artiﬁcial links in the master net-
work are left as it is, since they are essential in representing routes connecting interior
9

nodes with other subnetworks. Dropping SALs is a reasonable assumption when there
is limited interaction between subnetworks. Because we exclude SALs, the convergence
of DSTAP is no longer guaranteed and DSTAP now becomes a heuristic, which we call
DSTAP-Heuristic. Algorithm 2 shows the steps for DSTAP-Heuristic in detail, where
TAP subproblems are solved using the Goldstein-Levitin-Polyak gradient projection
algorithm (Jayakrishnan et al. 1994).
Algorithm 2 DSTAP-Heuristic for solving TAP
Inputs: network ﬁle, trips ﬁle, networks partitions as subnetworks
Step 1: Set up — validate partitions for connectivity, create master networks
and subnetworks, generate master net artiﬁcial links and corresponding artiﬁcial
origin-destination (OD) pairs inside subnetworks.
Step 2: Optimize
while relative gap on the full network > threshold AND iteration number <
desired maximum iterations do
Solve master network to a desired gap
Update the demand on subnetwork artiﬁcial OD pairs
Solve the subnetworks in parallel with the updated demand to a desired gap
Update the parameters for master network artiﬁcial links
Map ﬂows on used paths between OD pairs in the master network and subnet-
works to the full network and compute the full network relative gap
Outputs: Final full network gap and link ﬂows/costs
Due to the heuristic nature of the algorithm, the relative gap values obtained on the
full network after each iteration of DSTAP-Heuristic are not guaranteed to decrease
or converge to the optimal solution. However, removing SALs allows each iteration of
DSTAP-Heuristic to be faster than DSTAP, which as we demonstrate in Section 5,
can be used to warmstart the TAP problem and obtain faster solution than using a
centralized method.
3.2.
Partitioning algorithms
Computational performance of DSTAP and DSTAP-Heuristic also depends on the
choice of subnetwork boundaries. A good partition is the one that creates fewer
boundary nodes and where the subnetworks are “balanced” in size and have mini-
mal “interactions” among each other. Yahia, Pandey, and Boyles (2018) compared
two partitioning algorithms: the Shortest Domain Decomposition Algorithm (SDDA),
which incrementally builds the subnetworks using seed nodes located far apart, and
a ﬂow-weighted Spectral partitioning algorithm that minimizes the ﬂow across all cut
arcs (assuming the equilibrium ﬂows are available).
While both SDDA and Spectral partitioning algorithms can be applied for the DSTAP-
Heuristic, we desire partitions that minimize the ﬂows leaving the subnetwork and
entering back again, as this minimizes the role of SALs providing better convergence.
For a network with two subnetwork partitions, we deﬁne a statistic ψ as the diﬀerence
between the total ﬂow across the cut arcs (interﬂow) and the total demand for OD
pairs with origins and destinations in diﬀerent subnetworks (interdemand). That is,
ψ = Interﬂow −Interdemand.
(7)
10

If at equilibrium no path between an OD pair leaves a subnetwork and enters it back
again (implying zero ﬂow on all SALs), then ψ = 0. We hypothesize that partitions
with lower value of ψ generate solutions with lower relative gap than the ones with
higher ψ. As discussed in Section 5, lower ψ values result in a solution with lower or
equal relative gap (after 1 iteration of DSTAP), compared to solutions with higher ψ
values.
We propose an iterative partitioning-reﬁnement algorithm which is based on reﬁnement
approach proposed in Fiduccia and Mattheyses (1982) (commonly referred as the
FM reﬁnement). Given an initial partition, the algorithm performs local improvement
by evaluating the boundary nodes and moving one of the nodes that results in the
highest reduction in the current value of ψ, until a ﬁxed number of iterations or until
no reﬁnement is possible. The details of the ψ-FM algorithm are similar to the FM
algorithm shown in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 ψ−FM algorithm for improving partitions
Input: given partition of the network with an evaluated ψ
while ψ of partition cannot be lowered further do
Evaluate ψ
Loop through all boundary nodes and compare the reduction in ψ if nodes were
to be shifted from one partition to the next
Select the node which leads to highest reduction in the value of ψ
Revise the partition after shifting the selected node
In our experiments, we consider the ψ-FM reﬁnement with diﬀerent initial partitions
including SDDA, Spectral, and the partitions generated by the well-known partitioning
solver METIS (Karypis and Kumar 1998). We adopt two variants of the METIS solver:
• METISv1: this partitioning heuristic partitions a network into n balanced par-
titions with minimal total ﬂow across all the cut links. It shares the same objec-
tive as the Spectral partitioning, though unlike Spectral partitioning it utilizes
multi-level partitioning heuristic than the eigenvalue decomposition. See the doc-
umentation for ﬂow-weighted METIS solver for additional details (Karypis and
Kumar 1998).
• METISv2: this partitioning heuristic is same as METISv1, except that the ﬂow
weight on each link is replaced with a value of 1. Eﬀectively, METISv2 solves for
a partition with minimal number of cut links.
We note that the deﬁnition of ψ in Equation (7) can be extended to more than one
partition; however, the iterative ψ−FM algorithm is not guaranteed to converge for
more than two partitions (Fiduccia and Mattheyses 1982) . Thereby, we focus our ex-
periments with ψ−FM for networks with two-partitions and leave the detailed analysis
for more than two partitions for future work.
4.
Other modeling details for DSTAP-Heuristic
We now present some speciﬁc modeling choices for the DSTAP-Heuristic necessary for
full reproducibility of results.
11

4.1.
Constrained shortest path problem for the master network
An artiﬁcial link in the master network either connects an origin inside each subnet-
work with a boundary node of the subnetwork, or connects a boundary node with a
destination in the subnetwork. This artiﬁcial link models all the paths in the subnet-
work connecting its head and tail nodes. However, depending on the choice of partition,
it is possible that origin and destination nodes may be located at the boundary of the
subnetwork, resulting in feasible paths that include two consecutive artiﬁcial links. For
example, the master network shown in Figure 5(a) (corresponding to the full network
in Figure 1) includes both nodes 8 and 11 as destinations in subnetwork 2, where node
8 is also a boundary node (whose incoming links include both an artiﬁcial link and a
physical link).
We argue that a path in the master network must not include two consecutive artiﬁcial
links. This is because, if there were two consecutive artiﬁcial links x and y, then the
subpath [x, y] eﬀectively models all paths within a subnetwork connecting the head
node of x (denoted by xh) with the tail node of y (denoted by yt); however, these
paths should instead be modeled through a direct artiﬁcial link connecting xh and yt.
Standard label-correcting algorithms cannot be used to ﬁnd shortest paths under this
constraint, as the Bellman property is not satisﬁed. For example, consider the destina-
tion nodes 8 and 11 in the master network shown in Figure 5(a). The shortest path to
node 11 which does not contain two consecutive artiﬁcial links is [1, 5, 7, 6, 8, 11]; how-
ever, the subpath [1, 5, 7, 6, 8] is not the SP to node 8. We now present two approaches
for ﬁnding the shortest paths under the constraint of no consecutive artiﬁcial links.
11a
1
5
6
7
8
4
1
1
5
2
10
3
0
5
6
7
4
1
1
5
10
8p
8a
8
2
3
0
Subnetwork 1 node
Subnetwork 2 node
1
Artificial link
1
Physical link
(a)
(b)
11
1
1p
0
11
0
OD Pairs 1-8 and 1-11
Zero-cost link
Figure 5.: (a) Original master network, and the (b) transformed master network
Approach 1 Network transformation for any number of subnetworks First,
we propose a network transformation for solving the constrained SP problem. The pro-
posed transformation creates additional nodes and links for every zone in the network
and is presented in detail in Algorithm 4.
12

Algorithm 4 Master Network Transformation
Input: Master network Gmaster = (Nmaster, Amaster, Zmaster)
Output: Transformed master network Gt = (Nt, At, Zt)
Set transformed network to be identical to the given master network: Gt ←Gmaster
Deﬁne Nchild and A0cost as empty sets.
for all centroid nodes (or zones) z ∈Zt do
Create two “child nodes” zp and za and add it to sets:
Nt ←Nt ∪{zp, za},
Nchild ←Nchild ∪{zp, za}
if z is only an origin node then
Create two links with zero costs: (z, zp) and (z, za)
Add the created links to sets At and A0cost
else if z is only a destination node then
Create two links with zero costs: (zp, z) and (za, z)
Add the created links to sets At and A0cost
else if z is both an origin and a destination node then
Duplicate the zone for its origin and destination equivalent: zo and zd
Create four links with zero costs: (zo, zp), (zo, za), (zp, zd) and (za, zd)
Add the created links to sets At and A0cost
for all centroid nodes z ∈Zt do
for all incoming links l ∈Γ−1
z
such that l /∈A0cost do
Remove link l from incoming link set of node z: Γ−1
z
←Γ−1
z
\ {l}
if l is a physical link then
Add l to incoming set of child node zp: Γ−1
zp ←Γ−1
zp ∪{l}
else if l is an artiﬁcial link then
Add l to incoming set of child node za: Γ−1
za ←Γ−1
za ∪{l}
for all centroid nodes z ∈Zt do
for all outgoing links l ∈Γz such that l /∈A0cost do
Remove link l from outgoing link set of node z: Γz ←Γz \ {l}
if l is a physical link then
Add copy of link l as an outgoing link for each child node zp and za:
Γzp ←Γzp ∪{l},
Γza ←Γza ∪{l}
else if l is an artiﬁcial link then
Add copy of link l as an outgoing link for the corresponding zp node:
Γzp ←Γzp ∪{l}
Remove all child nodes without any incoming or outgoing link l ∈At \ A0ccost.
Figure 5(b) shows how node 8 is split into child nodes 8a and 8p. Nodes with subscript
a can only have artiﬁcial link as incoming links and only physical link as outgoing links.
On the other hand, nodes with subscript p can only have physical link as incoming links
and allow any link type as outgoing links. Hence, node 8a does not include the original
outgoing link (8, 11) since both its incoming and outgoing links cannot be artiﬁcial.
Next, we show that using standard label-correcting algorithms on the transformed
network solves the constrained SP problem.
Lemma 1. All paths from an origin to a destination in the transformed network
obtained from Algorithm 4 satisfy the no-consecutive-artiﬁcial-link path constraint
13

Proof. The proof follows from the design of transformed network where in its last
step the algorithm does not add outgoing artiﬁcial links to a child node (za) that has
an incoming artiﬁcial link.
Lemma 2. There exists a path in transformed network for every feasible path in the
original network
Proof. The proof is included in Appendix A.
From Lemma 1 we can argue that a shortest path found in transformed network is also
a feasible path in the original network. Similarly, from Lemma 2 we can argue that a
shortest path found in transformed network must be the shortest feasible path in the
original network, because if there were any other shorter feasible path, then the same
path would exist in the transformed network and would be found. Hence, solving the
shortest path problem on the transformed network will provide the shortest path in
the original master network that does not include two consecutive artiﬁcial links.
The network transformation approach in Algorithm 4 is general and can be applied
to partitions with more than two subnetworks. Unfortunately, the proposed trans-
formation creates several additional nodes and links in the master network. In our
experiments on large-scale networks, we observe that this increased network size can
slow the computation of the shortest path by up to twice the amount relative to when
path constraints are removed, which can be detrimental to the desired computational
eﬃciency of DSTAP-Heuristic.
Approach 2: For two subnetworks only The second approach designed for two-
subnetwork partition addresses the computational-eﬃciency issue while preserving
path constraints. This approach exploits the property that a shortest path for mas-
ter network with two subnetworks can have at most 3 links, and simply adapts the
one-to-all label-correcting algorithms for ﬁnding the shortest paths in master network
by avoiding two consecutive artiﬁcial links. Assuming the origin is in subnetwork 1
and destinations are in subnetwork 2, the algorithm completes the search of a shortest
path in the master network in three stages as follows:
(1) In stage 1 all outgoing artiﬁcial links from the origin are scanned and the cost
labels of link’s tail nodes are updated. Because an artiﬁcial link exists from
origin to every boundary node in subnetwork 1, this stage updates the cost label
of all boundary nodes in subnetwork 1. We note that if the origin is located at
the boundary, this step does not scan the physical links that might connect the
origin to boundary nodes of subnetwork 2.
(2) In stage 2, the cost labels of all boundary nodes are updated, considering only
the connections formed using physical links. An iterative label-setting procedure
is used that starts with all boundary nodes in subnetwork 1 as part of the scan-
eligible list (SEL). In each iteration, the node with lowest cost label is removed
from SEL and all its outgoing physical links are scanned to add other potential
nodes to SEL. Since all boundary nodes in subnetwork 2 are connected to a
boundary node in subnetwork 1 through a physical link, this stage guarantees
that cost labels of all boundary nodes will be updated. We note that it is possible
for the label of a boundary node in subnetwork 1 to be modiﬁed in this stage
14

if there exists an alternate shortest path using the physical links from another
boundary node.
(3) Stage 3 enumerates paths to all destinations in subnetwork 2 by exploiting the
property that path constraint violation can only occur in this stage. We enumer-
ate the shortest path for each destination in subnetwork 2 as back node labels
are not suﬃcient to construct the shortest path since Bellman’s principle does
not hold. Due to the property that the master net shortest path can have at
most 3 links, storing explicit shortest paths does not add signiﬁcant memory
constraints. In ﬁrst part of this stage, paths to all interior destinations are enu-
merated by scanning all incoming artiﬁcial links to the destination. In second
stage, the same process is repeated for all destinations at the boundary; how-
ever, now the destinations are scanned in increasing order of their cost labels.
Destination nodes at boundary already have cost labels from stage 2 and this
order of scanning ensures that we ﬁnd a path that may include another incoming
artiﬁcial link to the node.
Algorithm 5 provides the pseudocode for the 3-stage shortest path algorithm (termed
3-stage-SPP) on master network. For the network in Figure 5(a), the three stages
proceed as follows: in stage 1, cost labels of nodes 1, 5, 6 are updated to 0,1, and 4,
respectively; in stage 2, cost labels of nodes 5,6,7, and 8 are updated to 1,3,2, and 8
respectively, and in stage 3, paths to destination 11 is updated as [1,5,7,11] with a cost
of 12 units and to destination 8 is updated as [1,5,7,8] with a cost of 4 units.
It is easy to verify that 3-stage-SPP algorithm indeed ﬁnds the optimal path with
desired property of no-consecutive artiﬁcial links for two subnetwork partitions since
it accounts for artiﬁcial links only in ﬁrst and third stages which explicitly captures
the path constraint rule of no consecutive artiﬁcial links. Extending the algorithm for
more than 2 partitions will involve more than three stages and is left as part of the
future work.
Next, we determine the computational complexity of the 3-stage-SPP algorithm. If
bi, oi, and di are respectively the number of boundary nodes, origins, and destina-
tions in subnetwork i, i ∈{1, 2}, the computational complexity of stage 1 is O(b1),
stage 2 is O
 (b1 + b2)2
, and Stage 3 is O(d2b2 + b2
2). Since megaregional networks
have signiﬁcantly higher number of destinations in a subnetwork than the number of
boundary nodes, the algorithm has an overall complexity of O (d2b2). When repeated
for all origins, the all-to-all shortest path routine for master network has the com-
plexity O (o1d2b2 + o2d1b1), which is bounded by O
 |Zm|2|B|

, where Zm is the set of
zones in master network and B is the set of all boundary nodes.
We also note that if the path constraints are not modeled, the procedure for DSTAP-
Heuristic in Algorithm 2 still holds, albeit it might result in a further suboptimal
solution (since the proof in Jafari, Pandey, and Boyles (2017) relies on the assumption
that regional OD pair paths have alternating artiﬁcial and physical links.) If we apply
standard one-to-all Dijkstra’s algorithm to solve shortest paths in the master network,
the overall computational complexity is O
 |Zm||Nm|2
, where Nm is the set of all
nodes in the master network. Since |B| << |Nm| and |Zm| < |Nm|, the 3-stage-SPP
algorithm is more eﬃcient and saves additional computation time. In Section 5 we
quantify this savings for various networks.
15

Algorithm 5 One-to-all 3-stage-SPP algorithm for solving constrained shortest path
problem on master network with two partitions
1: Input: master network with physical and artiﬁcial links, associated link costs (given
by LinkCost(i, j) function for a link (i, j)), and an origin node o (assumed to be
in subnetwork 1)
2: Initialization: For the origin node, set cost label co = 0. For all other nodes
i ∈Nmaster \ {o}, set ci = ∞and back node label bi = null.
3: Stage 1: Update shortest cost labels for boundary nodes in subnetwork 1
4: for all outgoing artiﬁcial links (o, i) ∈Γo do
5:
if co + LinkCost(o, i) < ci then
6:
Set ci ←co + LinkCost(o, i) and bi ←o
7: Stage 2: Update shortest cost labels for all boundary nodes
8: Initialize scan eligible list (SEL) to all boundary nodes in subnetwork 1
9: while SEL is not empty do
10:
Remove a node from SEL with lowest cost label. Call it n.
11:
for all outgoing physical links (n, i) ∈Γn do
12:
if cn + LinkCost(n, i) < ci then
13:
Set ci ←cn + LinkCost(n, i) and bi ←n
14:
SEL ←SEL ∪{i}
15: Stage 3: Deﬁne shortest path to each destination in subnetwork 2
16: Deﬁne empty shortest path variable πd ←null for all destinations d in subnetwork
2.
17: Stage 3a: Update paths to interior destinations
18: for all destination d in subnetwork 2 that are not boundary nodes do
19:
for all incoming artiﬁcial links (i, d) ∈Γ−1
d
do
20:
if ci + LinkCost(i, d) < cd then
21:
Set cd ←ci + LinkCost(i, d)
22:
Append node d to path to i: πd ←tracePathTo(i) ⊕d
23: Stage 3b: Update paths to destinations that are at the boundary
24: for all destinations d in subnetwork 2 that are boundary nodes in increasing order
of current cost labels do
25:
for all incoming artiﬁcial links (i, d) ∈Γ−1
d
do
26:
if ci + LinkCost(i, d) < cd then
27:
Set cd ←ci + LinkCost(i, d)
28:
Append node d to path to i: πd ←tracePathTo(i) ⊕d
16

4.2.
Handling centroid connectors and network pruning
Transportation networks consist of centroids (or zones) where trips originate and end.
Commonly, it is assumed that ﬁrst ζ nodes in the network are centroids and any link
originating or terminating at those nodes is a centroid connector. If a partitioning
algorithm ﬁnds a cut passing through a centroid connector, it can result in a discon-
nected OD pair which is undesirable. We circumvent this problem by ﬁrst removing
all centroids and centroid connectors from the network prior to the partitioning, then
applying a partitioning algorithm on the modiﬁed network, and then reattaching the
centroids to the appropriate nodes and partition. If during the reattachment process,
a centroid is found connected to nodes in diﬀerent subnetworks, copies of the centroid
are created one for each subnetwork, to ensure the connectivity of OD pairs in the
master network and subnetworks. Furthermore, to model the constraint that the cen-
troids should only be at the ends of any path in a network, we set the ﬁrst through
node for the masternetwork and subnetworks to be the same value as the complete
network, which is equal to ζ + 1 by the convention in Transportation Networks for
Research Core Team (2019).
In addition to potential duplication of centroids, we note that for partitioning using
Spectral and METISv1 algorithms, we drop the links that have zero ﬂow. This is
consistent with the design of METISv1 (Karypis and Kumar 1998) and Spectral (Bell
et al. 2017; Yahia, Pandey, and Boyles 2018) algorithms to prevent ﬁnding a cut
that passes through zero ﬂow links as this often results in an imbalanced cut. For
transportation networks, zero ﬂow links are a result of unused portions of network
that are not used by a traveler. Dropping the zero ﬂow links might create disconnected
portions of network. In our analysis, we consider the largest connected portion for
further partitioning and drop the other portion. This dropping of nodes and links can
thus result in DSTAP-Heuristic working on a smaller portion of the network than
the original network; however, there is no loss of accuracy as the TAP can be solved
separately on other smaller disconnected portions.
4.3.
Best possible gap achieved using DSTAP-Heuristic
The performance of DSTAP-Heuristic depends on the choice of the partition and
whether there is “signiﬁcant” proportion of demand leaving a subnetwork and entering
back again.
As stated earlier, the value of ψ−statistic plays a role in the quality of partition. If
we are able to ﬁnd a partition with ψ = 0, then DSTAP-heuristic (as described in
Section 3.1) converges to the optimal within a threshold as argued in the original
DSTAP work. Unfortunately, if we relax path constraints in the master network or
have a partition where ψ > 0, then convergence is not guaranteed.
In our experiments, we found that DSTAP-Heuristic shows initial convergence, though
the relative gap begins to oscillate as the iterations are continued. Given its heuristic
nature, we report the best possible relative gap for DSTAP-Heuristic obtained across
all iterations. The value of best possible relative gap depends on (a) the number of
cut links/boundary nodes, and (b) the value of ψ. In the next section, we demonstrate
that despite its heuristic nature and lack of theoretical guarantees, DSTAP-Heuristic
is a useful algorithm for improving computational eﬃciencies of solving the TAP.
17

5.
Results
We conduct experiments on six mid- to large-scale test networks obtained from the
transportation networks test problems repository (Transportation Networks for Re-
search Core Team 2019) including Berlin Center, Austin, Goldcoast, Philadelphia,
Chicago Regional, and Texas1. All experiments are conducted on a Linux machine
Ubuntu 18.04, 32 GB of memory and Intel i5 processor 3.30 GHz.
First, we report the beneﬁts of using DSTAP-Heuristic over DSTAP. Table 1 shows
the number of additional nodes and links generated by DSTAP and DSTAP-Heuristic
procedures for diﬀerent networks partitioned using a given partitioning heuristic.2 For
each subnetwork and the master network, we report the total number of nodes, number
of physical links (ones that are present in the complete network before partitioning),
and the number of artiﬁcial links generated to model interactions between interior
and boundary nodes and to model subnetwork interactions. As observed, modeling
subnetwork interaction in DSTAP leads to creation of 0.8%–2.4% additional nodes
and 1.9%–21.4% additional SALs. Each additional SAL has an associated OD pair
in the other subnetwork, and thus leads to creation of up to 3.5% additional origins
requiring additional shortest path computation. By dropping the SALs, the network
in DSTAP-Heuristic is simpliﬁed, allowing for computational eﬃciency over the cen-
tralized algorithm that we discuss next. The master networks in both DSTAP and
DSTAP-Heuristic are identical with up to 1650 times more artiﬁcial links than physical
links. However, as discussed in Section 3.1, master network artiﬁcial links are essential
for the DSTAP-Heuristic process and with an appropriate choice of the shortest path
routine, these links do not add signiﬁcant burden to computations.
Next, we demonstrate the computational advantage of using the 3-stage-SPP algorithm
relative to solving Dijkstra’s algorithm on the entire Master network. Figure 6 shows
the time it took to solve master network using the 3-stage-SPP algorithm and solving
Dijkstra’s on the entire master network. As observed, the 3-stage-SPP algorithm is
up to 10 times more eﬃcient than solving Dijkstra’s algorithm on the entire network
because it exploits the layout of master network where artiﬁcial links only appear in
ﬁrst and third stages.
1The Texas network was obtained from the statewide regional model and is the largest network among
all instances with 44798 nodes, 122944 links, and 4667 zones. Other networks statistics are provided in the
Appendix B.
2As explained in Section 5.1 all partitioning heuristics performed relatively similarly across the test networks.
In this section, we report results for the heuristic that took the least time in solving the network to a relative
gap of 1E−4 after warmstarting DSTAP using the solution obtained from one run of DSTAP-Heuristic.
18

Table 1.: Comparison of number of SALs generated by DSTAP and DSTAP-Heuristic.
In DSTAP-Heuristic the number of artiﬁcial links are simply dropped. The three-tuple
values indicate number of nodes, number of physical links, and number of artiﬁcial
links.
Network
DSTAP
DSTAP-Heuristic
Austin
Masternet- (1094, 81, 74079)
Subnetwork 1- (3777, 9242, 1441)
Subnetwork 2- (3867, 9376, 1510)
Masternet- (1094, 81, 74079)
Subnetwork 1- (3685, 9242, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (3779, 9376, 0)
Berlin
Masternet- (637, 113, 55416)
Subnetwork 1- (6554, 13527, 2466)
Subnetwork 2- (6681, 14730, 2413)
Masternet- (637, 113, 55416)
Subnetwork 1- (6432, 13527, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (6549, 14730, 0)
Goldcoast
Masternet- (1089, 20, 20756)
Subnetwork 1- (2218, 5108, 100)
Subnetwork 2- (2609, 6008, 112)
Masternet- (1089, 20, 20756)
Subnetwork 1- (2194, 5108, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (2587, 6008, 0)
Chicago
Masternet- (1919, 159, 262868)
Subnetwork 1- (6509, 19229, 4673)
Subnetwork 2- (6776, 19630, 5351)
Masternet- (1919, 159, 262868)
Subnetwork 1- (6351, 19229, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (6628, 19630, 0)
Philadelphia
Masternet- (1623, 158, 223258)
Subnetwork 1- (6874, 20606, 5811)
Subnetwork 2- (6819, 19239, 4950)
Masternet- (1623, 158, 223258)
Subnetwork 1- (6728, 20606, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (6661, 19239, 0)
Texas
Masternet- (1729, 192, 207593)
Subnetwork 1- (22467, 61780, 7998)
Subnetwork 2- (22599, 60520, 7640)
Masternet- (1729, 192, 207593)
Subnetwork 1- (22293, 61780, 0)
Subnetwork 2- (22421, 60520, 0)
Berlin
Austin
Goldcoast
Chicago Regional
Philadelphia
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time (sec)
3-stage-SPP
Dijkstra
Figure 6.: Comparison of computation time to solve master network using two diﬀerent
shortest path routines: the 3-stage-SPP algorithm and standard Dijkstra’s algorithm
Next, we compare the computation times obtained from DSTAP-Heuristic relative to
the centralized approach for diﬀerent test networks, as shown in Table 2. Column 2
shows the lowest relative gap obtained from running DSTAP-Heuristic and the par-
tition obtaining that gap. Columns 3 and 4 show the computation time taken by
DSTAP-Heuristic and the centralized algorithm to reach that gap (using the gradient
projection algorithm as the TAP solver for all cases).
19

Table 2.: Comparison of computation time for generating solutions up to a certain
relative gap using DSTAP-Heuristic vs gradient projection (GP)
Computation time till best gap (sec)
Network
Best gap
DSTAP-Heuristic
DSTAP-Heuristic
using GP
Centralized
using GP
%-savings
Berlin
0.0273 (METISv2)
18.21
41.88
56.5%
Austin
0.1712 (ψ-FM METISv2)
48.61
86.09
43.5%
Goldcoast
0.0608 (Spectral)
47.94
100.92
52.5%
Chicago
0.0744 (METISv2)
231.87
439.76
47.3%
Philadelphia
0.7226 (ψ-FM METISv2)
241.09
284.11
15.1%
Texas
0.0175 (METISv2)
1464.43
4551.87
67.8%
We make following key observations:
• First, the best-possible achieved gap using the DSTAP-Heuristic depends on the
choice of partitioning algorithm and varies in the range of 0.02–0.72 for various
networks. Due to its heuristic nature, DSTAP-Heuristic is not guaranteed to
monotonically reduce the relative gap from one iteration to the next.
• We observe that, with the exception of Goldcoast network, METISv2 partitions
or its variant obtained using ψ−FM reﬁnement did the best in obtaining the
lowest gap after an iteration of DSTAP-Heuristic relative to other partitioning
algorithms. METISv2 simply relies on the indegree and outdegree of network
nodes and generates a balanced partition relative to the ones generated by other
algorithms. METISv2 is also advantageous over Spectral and METISv1 parti-
tions since it does not rely on prior knowledge of equilibrium ﬂows that are
sometimes unavailable. We also observe that the ψ-FM reﬁnement does better
than the partitions without this reﬁnement for 2 out of the 6 tested networks.
• For all network instances, DSTAP-Heuristic took lesser time than the central-
ized approach (solved to same relative gap as the best possible achieved gap
by DSTAP-Heuristic) generating a percent time savings ranging between 15.1–
67.8%. This demonstrates the usefulness of DSTAP-Heuristic to obtain eﬃcient
approximation to TAP solutions than using a centralized approach.
Figure 7 shows the split of computation times across four subroutines of DSTAP-
Heuristic. The split is reported as a percent of the total time spent in (a) solving
the master network to a prespeciﬁed relative gap of 0.05, (b) solving subnetworks in
parallel to a relative gap of 0.05, (c) mapping the ﬂow obtained on DSTAP-Heuristic
network to the full network, and (d) computing full network relative gap. As expected,
solving subnetworks in parallel takes a signiﬁcant portion of the DSTAP-Heuristic time
(> 55% for all networks). Master network computations are relatively lower (< 15%),
credited to the 3-stage-SPP algorithm. Computing the relative gap on the full network
takes the second-highest time for all networks since solving full network gap requires
solving shortest path on the full network, which is time-consuming. If full network
relative gap computation is skipped (such as when the termination criterion is based
on performing a ﬁxed number of iterations), DSTAP-Heuristic will prove additionally
useful.
20

Figure 7.: Percent of total DSTAP Heuristic from Table 2 that is spent in diﬀerent
subroutines
(a) Austin ψ-FM METISv2 parti-
tion
(b) Berlin METISv2 partition
(c) Goldcoast Spectral partition
(d) Chicago METISv2 partition
(e) Philadelphia ψ-FM METISv2
partition
(f) Texas METISv2 2-net partition
Figure 8.: All network partitions that performed the best relative to the centralized
gradient projection
21

Figure 8 shows the partitions on these networks. For all the network instances, the
partitions generated are well-balanced and may explore the geographical features of
the city. For example, the METISv2 partition for Austin network cuts bridges on the
Colorado river for a portion of the partitioning line. Similarly, the Texas network is
partitioned with each subnetwork containing the major cities (Dallas and Houston
in blue partition, and Austin, San Antonio and El Paso in the red partition). For
the Philadelphia network, while the Delaware river runs through the city, dividing the
network just using the bridges as cut links would have resulted in imbalanced partition.
Instead, ψ-FM METISv2 partition uses a portion of river as the boundary between
subnetworks and the remainder of the boundary passes through the city. The partitions
for Berlin, Goldcoast and Chicago Regional networks are standard balanced partitions
without a clear geographical interpretation. While the best achieved relative gap is still
high using these partitions is high, the computational advantage of DSTAP-Heuristic
makes it suitable for obtaining an approximate TAP solution or for warmstarting a
TAP using standard algorithms which we demonstrate next.
5.1.
Warm Starting TAP using DSTAP-Heuristic Solution
Due to its heuristic nature, DSTAP-Heuristic is not guaranteed to converge. In this
section, we report improvements obtained from using DSTAP-Heuristic to warm start
a traditional TAP algorithm (in our case, gradient projection). This warm starting
guarantees convergence to the optimal solution and is faster than the traditional TAP
algorithm for all tested networks.
Figure 9 presents results for the set of experiments where warm-starting was imple-
mented after one iteration of DSTAP-heuristic for the networks mentioned earlier.
First, as a general trend, we observe that the proposed heuristic performs better than
centralized gradient projection for all tested networks. However, there are partitions
that take longer than the centralized algorithm. METISv2 did consistently better
for all networks. Second, depending on the network characteristics, the performance
of DSTAP-Heuristic may only be marginally better. The observed beneﬁt narrows
signiﬁcantly for the Gold Coast and Philadelphia networks, where warm-starting using
the heuristic performs marginally better than the centralized algorithm.
Table 3 presents the percent savings obtained from using DSTAP-Heuristic for warm-
starting TAP for the best partition instance for three demand levels with scaling
factors as 1.0 (base demand), 0.85 (low demand), and 1.5 (high demand). We do not
generate new partitions for low and high demand scenarios to demonstrate the useful-
ness of partitions generated at base demand (demand factor 1.0). As observed, for all
demand levels and for all networks, DSTAP-Heuristic generates computational savings
between 2.0%–47.05% relative to centralized gradient projection. There is no clear ev-
idence that increasing the demand increases the beneﬁt of DSTAP-Heuristic; however,
this may be due to the choice of same partition as base demand.
The application of proposed DSTAP-Heuristic as a warmstarting tool is highlighted
by the results. Beyond the ﬁrst iteration, the gap for warmstart and no-warmstart
case reduce at similar rates due to usage of the same centralized algorithm. Therefore,
the cause for the savings is isolated at warmstarting. The results provide evidence for
usability of the proposed heuristic on large networks and the associated time saving,
while overcoming the heuristic gap issue. The detailed numerical results and partition
22

(a) Austin
(b) Berlin
(c) Goldcoast
(d) Chicago
(e) Philadelphia
Figure 9.: Plots of relative gap as a function of computation time after warmstarting
gradient projection using the path ﬂows obtained after 1 iteration of DSTAP-Heuristic
for various networks.
23

statistics can be found in Appendix B.
5.2.
Using DSTAP Heuristic for Megaregions
Last, to demonstrate the usefulness of DSTAP-Heuristic for solving TAP on megare-
gions, we analyze the performance of the heuristic on the Texas network which consists
of major cities such as Austin, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio.
Megaregional networks commonly have higher density of links and nodes in the city
area, and are relatively sparse in other locations. An intuitive way to partition a
megaregion would be to consider each city as its own subnetwork; this intuitive parti-
tioning aligns with how the regional models are maintained, where the state handles
solving TAP on a relative sparse statewide network, while the MPOs handle solving
TAPs on a detailed citywide network. However, it is a diﬃcult process to determine
where the boundary of partitions should pass, and which cities should be grouped to-
gether, which is where the default graph partitioning algorithms can be used. Due to
the superior performance of METISv2 partitions, we use the same for Texas megare-
gional network. Figure 10 shows the partitions generated using METISv2 algorithm
for the Texas megaregion considering two and three subnetworks.
(a) Texas METISv2 2-net parti-
tion
(b) Texas METISv2 3-net parti-
tion
Figure 10.: Two- and Three-subnetwork partitions for Texas that performed the best
relative to the centralized gradient projection
For the Texas network, we run DSTAP-Heuristic for one iteration and use the obtained
solution to warm start the gradient projection solver. We compare the computation
time taken to solve the megaregion to a relative gap less than 1E−4 compared relative
to the centralized method without warmstarting. We observe that the solution time
for TAP using centralized gradient projection without warmstarting in 384 minutes.
Whereas, if we allow warmstarting through DSTAP-Heuristic, then the solution time
using two subnetworks is 269 minutes and using three subnetworks is 261 minutes.
Thus, we save 30% of computation time on average using DSTAP-heuristic to warm
start the TAP for megaregions.
24

Table 3.: Comparison of computation time for centralized gradient projection when solved to a relative gap of 1E−4 without (“Central-
ized”) and with (“DSTAP-Heuristic”) warmstarting using the DSTAP-Heuristic algorithm
Demand
Factor
Computation
time
Network
Austin
Berlin-
Center
Goldcoast
Chicago
Regional
Philadelphia
0.85
Centralized
time (sec)
442.64
119.88
409.73
1530.40
2883.65
DSTAP-Heuristic
time (sec)
404.50
63.48
350.38
1165.89
2198.49
% savings
8.62%
47.05%
14.49%
23.82%
23.76%
1.0
Centralized
time (sec)
684.10
144.18
616.25
1912.71
2673.76
DSTAP-Heuristic
time (sec)
425.55
78.29
555.08
1646.68
2357.19
% savings
37.8%
45.70%
9.93%
13.91%
11.84%
1.5
Centralized
time (sec)
869.42
182.9
1129.91
4752.40
4004.96
DSTAP-Heuristic
time (sec)
687.49
102.09
1162.42
3649.99
3435.46
% savings
20.93%
44.18%
−2.88%
23.20%
14.22%
25

Figure 11.: Performance on the Texas network using METISv2 two and three subnet-
work partitions
6.
Conclusions
Computational eﬃciency of TAP is an important concern as networks grow in size and
resolution and for megaregional planning. This article proposes a network decomposi-
tion heuristic for solving TAP with associated network transformation for solving the
constrained shortest path and an iterative reﬁnement approach for network partition-
ing. The results compare the performance of the proposed heuristic and centralized
gradient projection algorithm for multiple large-scale networks, showing the computa-
tional beneﬁts of warmstarting using the proposed heuristic, with an average computa-
tional savings of 10–35% over a TAP solver without warmstarting. The computational
beneﬁt is observed for all tested networks and for diﬀerent demand levels. Partitions
generated by METISv2 algorithm or its variant obtained after ψ-FM reﬁnement were
found to achieve the lowest gap after an iteration of DSTAP-Heuristic. Based on our
ﬁndings, we recommend the use of DSTAP-Heuristic to warm start TAP solutions for
ﬁnding eﬃcient solutions in limited time.
Various directions for future research can be identiﬁed. First, investigating newer net-
work partitioning algorithms with additional metrics or explanatory variables can help
improve the performance of DSTAP-Heuristic. This includes partitioning based on lat-
itude and longitudes of nodes in a regional network (Schild and Sommer 2015) and/or
natural divisions, such as a river, that have demonstrated eﬃciency for solving short-
est path on megaregional networks. Second, various component models for DSTAP-
Heuristic can be enhanced based on latest advancements in the TAP literature. These
include using contraction hierarchies (Schneck and N¨okel 2020), using bush-based algo-
rithms for solving TAP on master and subnetworks (Bar-Gera 2010), and incorporating
other techniques of parallelization such as ones based on OD pair (Chen and Meyer
1988) or parallel block-coordinate-descent for gradient projection (Chen et al. 2020)
in tandem with geographic partitions. Finally, the geographical partitioning methods
can be extended for solving equilibrium on dynamic networks, which pose additional
constraints due to time dependencies and modeling of queue spillbacks.
26

Acknowledgements
Authors would like to thank Texas Department of Transportation for sharing the
statewide model data that was used to create the Texas network used in this analysis.
We also acknowledge the input and feedback from Steve Boyles on several earlier drafts
of this article. Partial research by the ﬁrst author was also supported by the Center
for Advanced Transportation Mobility, University Transportation Center, and NSF
Grant No. 2106989.
References
Bar-Gera, Hillel. 2002. “Origin-based algorithm for the traﬃc assignment problem.” Trans-
portation Science 36 (4): 398–417.
Bar-Gera, Hillel. 2010. “Traﬃc assignment by paired alternative segments.” Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological 44 (8-9): 1022–1046.
Beckmann, Martin, Charles B McGuire, and Christopher B Winsten. 1956. “Studies in the
Economics of Transportation.” (RM-1488-PR).
Bell, Michael GH, Fumitaka Kurauchi, Supun Perera, and Walter Wong. 2017. “Investigat-
ing transport network vulnerability by capacity weighted spectral analysis.” Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological 99: 251–266.
Boyles, Stephen D., Nicholas E. Lownes, and A. Unnikrishnan. 2020. Transportation Network
Analysis. 0th ed., Vol. 1.
Buchhold, Valentin, Peter Sanders, and Dorothea Wagner. 2018. “Real-time traﬃc assignment
using fast queries in customizable contraction hierarchies.” In 17th International Sympo-
sium on Experimental Algorithms (SEA 2018), Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer In-
formatik.
Buchhold, Valentin, Peter Sanders, and Dorothea Wagner. 2019. “Real-time traﬃc assignment
using engineered customizable contraction hierarchies.” Journal of Experimental Algorith-
mics (JEA) 24: 1–28.
Chen, Anthony, R Jayakrishnan, and Wei K Tsai. 2002. “Faster Frank-Wolfe traﬃc assignment
with new ﬂow update scheme.” Journal of Transportation Engineering 128 (1): 31–39.
Chen, Rong-Jaye, and Robert R Meyer. 1988. “Parallel optimization for traﬃc assignment.”
Mathematical Programming 42 (1-3): 327–345.
Chen, Xinyuan, Zhiyuan Liu, Kai Zhang, and Zewen Wang. 2020. “A parallel computing ap-
proach to solve traﬃc assignment using path-based gradient projection algorithm.” Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 120: 102809.
Daneva, Maria, and Per Olov Lindberg. 2003. “A conjugate direction Frank-Wolfe method
with applications to the traﬃc assignment problem.” In Operations Research Proceedings
2002, 133–138. Springer.
Dial, Robert B. 1999. “Network-optimized road pricing: Part II: Algorithms and examples.”
Operations Research 47 (2): 327–336.
Dial, Robert B. 2006. “A path-based user-equilibrium traﬃc assignment algorithm that ob-
viates path storage and enumeration.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 40
(10): 917–936.
Fiduccia, Charles M, and Robert M Mattheyses. 1982. “A linear-time heuristic for improving
network partitions.” In 19th Design Automation Conference, 175–181. IEEE.
Florian, Michael, Isabelle Constantin, and Dan Florian. 2009. “A new look at projected gradi-
ent method for equilibrium assignment.” Transportation Research Record 2090 (1): 10–16.
Florian, Michael, and Michel Gendreau. 2001. “Applications of parallel computing in trans-
portation.” Parallel Computing 27 (12): 1521–1522.
Frank, Marguerite, and Philip Wolfe. 1956. “An algorithm for quadratic programming.” Naval
research logistics quarterly 3 (1-2): 95–110.
27

Gentile, Guido. 2014. “Local User Cost Equilibrium: a bush-based algorithm for traﬃc assign-
ment.” Transportmetrica A: Transport Science 10 (1): 15–54.
Gokalp, Can, Priyadarshan N Patil, and Stephen D Boyles. 2021. “Post-disaster recovery
sequencing strategy for road networks.” Transportation research part B: methodological 153:
228–245.
Holmgren, Johan, and Per Olov Lindberg. 2014. “Upright Stiﬀ: subproblem updating in the
FW method for traﬃc assignment.” EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 3 (3-4):
205–225.
Jafari, Ehsan. 2017. “Network modeling and design: a distributed problem solving approach.”
PhD diss., The University of Texas at Austin.
Jafari, Ehsan, and Stephen D Boyles. 2016. “Improved bush-based methods for network con-
traction.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 83: 298–313.
Jafari, Ehsan, Venktesh Pandey, and Stephen D Boyles. 2017. “A decomposition approach to
the static traﬃc assignment problem.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 105:
270–296.
Jayakrishnan, R, Wei T Tsai, Joseph N Prashker, and Subodh Rajadhyaksha. 1994. “A Faster
Path-Based Algorithm for Traﬃc Assignment.” .
Karypis, George, and Vipin Kumar. 1998. “A fast and high quality multilevel scheme for
partitioning irregular graphs.” SIAM Journal on scientiﬁc Computing 20 (1): 359–392.
Kumar, Amit, and Srinivas Peeta. 2010. “Slope-based multipath ﬂow update algorithm for
static user equilibrium traﬃc assignment problem.” Transportation research record 2196
(1): 1–10.
Kumar, Amit, and Srinivas Peeta. 2014. “Slope-based path shift propensity algorithm for the
static traﬃc assignment problem.” International Journal for Traﬃc and Transport Engi-
neering 4 (3): 297–319.
Kumar, Vipin, and Vineet Singh. 1991. “Scalability of parallel algorithms for the all-pairs
shortest-path problem.” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 13 (2): 124–138.
Larsson, Torbj¨orn, and Michael Patriksson. 1992. “Simplicial decomposition with disaggre-
gated representation for the traﬃc assignment problem.” Transportation Science 26 (1):
4–17.
LeBlanc, Larry J, Edward K Morlok, and William P Pierskalla. 1975. “An eﬃcient approach to
solving the road network equilibrium traﬃc assignment problem.” Transportation research
9 (5): 309–318.
Lee, Der-Horng, Yu Nie, and Anthony Chen. 2003. “A conjugate gradient projection algorithm
for the traﬃc assignment problem.” Mathematical and computer modelling 37 (7-8): 863–
878.
Levin, Michael, Roshan Kumar, N Nezamuddin, Natalia Ruiz Juri, and S Travis Waller. 2011.
“Utilizing a Static-based Initial Feasible Solution to Expedite the Convergence of Dynamic
Traﬃc Assignment Problems.” .
Levin, Michael W, Stephen D Boyles, and Nezamuddin. 2015. “Warm-starting dynamic traﬃc
assignment with static solutions.” Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics 3 (2): 99–113.
Mitradjieva, Maria, and Per Olov Lindberg. 2013. “The stiﬀis moving—Conjugate direction
Frank-Wolfe methods with applications to traﬃc assignment.” Transportation Science 47
(2): 280–293.
Nezamuddin. 2011. “Improving the eﬃciency of dynamic traﬃc assignment through computa-
tional methods based on combinatorial algorithm.” PhD diss., ”The University of Texas at
Austin”.
Nie, Yu Marco. 2010. “A class of bush-based algorithms for the traﬃc assignment problem.”
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 44 (1): 73–89.
Patil, Priyadarshan, Rydell Walthall, and Stephen D Boyles. 2022. “Budget-Constrained Rail
Electriﬁcation Modeling Using Symmetric Traﬃc Assignment: A North American Case
Study.” Journal of Infrastructure Systems 28 (2): 04022007.
Patil, Priyadarshan N., Katherine C. Ross, and Stephen D. Boyles. 2021. “Convergence behav-
ior for traﬃc assignment characterization metrics.” Transportmetrica A: Transport Science
28

17 (4): 1244–1271. https://doi.org/10.1080/23249935.2020.1857883.
Patriksson, Michael. 2015. The traﬃc assignment problem: models and methods. Courier Dover
Publications.
Peeta, Srinivas, Amit Kumar, and Sushant Sharma. 2011. “Post-Processing Techniques to
Enhance Reliability of Assignment Algorithm Based Performance Measures.” .
Powell, Warren B, and Yosef Sheﬃ. 1982. “The convergence of equilibrium algorithms with
predetermined step sizes.” Transportation Science 16 (1): 45–55.
Raadsen, Mark Pieter Hendrik. 2018. “Aggregation and decomposition methods in traﬃc as-
signment: towards consistent and eﬃcient planning models in a multi-scale environment.”
PhD diss., University of Sydney.
Schild, Aaron, and Christian Sommer. 2015. “On balanced separators in road networks.” In
International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, 286–297. Springer.
Schneck, Arne, and Klaus N¨okel. 2020. “Accelerating traﬃc assignment with customizable
contraction hierarchies.” Transportation research record 2674 (1): 188–196.
Transportation Networks for Research Core Team. 2019. “Transportation Networks for Re-
search.” https://github.com/bstabler/TransportationNetworks. Accessed: May 12,
2022.
United States Bureau of Public Roads. 1964. Traﬃc assignment manual for application with a
large, high speed computer. Vol. 37. US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads.
Wardrop, John Glen, and James Ivor Whitehead. 1952. “Correspondence. some theoretical
aspects of road traﬃc research.” Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers 1 (5):
767–768.
Xie, Jun, Yu Nie, and Xiaobo Liu. 2018. “A greedy path-based algorithm for traﬃc assign-
ment.” Transportation Research Record 2672 (48): 36–44.
Xie, Jun, and Chi Xie. 2016. “New insights and improvements of using paired alternative
segments for traﬃc assignment.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 93: 406–
424.
Yahia, Cesar N, Venktesh Pandey, and Stephen D Boyles. 2018. “Network Partitioning Al-
gorithms for Solving the Traﬃc Assignment Problem using a Decomposition Approach.”
Transportation Research Record 2672 (48): 116–126.
Ziliaskopoulos, Athanasios, Dimitrios Kotzinos, and Hani S Mahmassani. 1997. “Design and
implementation of parallel time-dependent least time path algorithms for intelligent trans-
portation systems applications.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 5
(2): 95–107.
29

Appendix A. Proof for Lemma 2
Proof. First, we deﬁne a mapping relating every path in the transformed network to
a path in the original network. Let Πtransformed be set of all paths in the transformed
network and Πfeasible
original be the set of all feasible paths in the original network. We deﬁne
a mapping f : Πtransformed →Πfeasible
original as follows:
• If the path passes through a node zo, zd, zp or za, replace the occurrence with
the z
• If node z has multiple consecutive occurrences, then replace it with one occur-
rence of z
For example, a path [1o, 1p, 2a, 3, 4p, 5p, 6, 7a, 7d] will map to a path [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] in
the original network. We can now show that f is a surjective mapping which completes
the proof.
Let [o, x1, . . . , xn, d] ∈Πfeasible
original be a feasible path representing an ordered list of nodes
connecting origin zone o to destination zone d. For the mapping f to be surjective,
we must be able to ﬁnd a path π ∈Πtransformed that maps to this path. In a general
case, this path may pass through other centroid nodes. Let’s assume that all nodes
x1, x2, . . . , xn are centroids. Then, by the construction of network transformation, if
the link connecting (xi, xi+1) is artiﬁcial, then we have replaced it with link (xi
p, xi+1
a
).
On the other hand, if the link connecting (xi, xi+1) is a physical link, then we have
replaced it with two links (xi
a, xi+1
p
) and (xi
p, xi+1
p
). This process applies for all links in
the original network path, hence, there exists a path in the transformed network for
every feasible path in the original network.
30

Appendix B. Detailed Partition Statistics
Austin network results are shown in Table B1.3
Table B1.: Austin Network Partition
Austin network (n = 7466, m = 18710)
Partition
METISv1
ψ−FM
METISv1
ψ−FM
METISv2
n1 : n2
3796 : 3667
3799 : 3664
3685 : 3779
m1 : m2
10434 : 8169
9387 : 9207
9242 : 9376
# boundary
nodes
94
98
90
# cut
links
95
101
81
ψ
9580.93
6810.11
16223.7
Centralized
time to reach
gap 1E-4
502.72
502.72
502.72
Total DSTAP
warmstarting
time (sec)
448.66
410.68
416.46
Fullnet
gap from 1
itr of DSTAP
0.1698
0.1312
0.1712
3The total number of links (or nodes) across diﬀerent partitions along with the cut links (or boundary nodes)
may not add up to the total in the network as certain nodes/links were dropped to ensure network connectivity
and those nodes/links were not being used.
31

Table B2.: Berlin-center Network Partition
Berlin-center network (n = 12981, m = 28376)
Partition
Spectral
ψ−FM
Spectral
METISv1
METISv2
ψ−FM
METISv2
n1 : n2
6443 : 6538
6450 : 6531
5891 : 5794
6432 : 6549
6427 : 6554
m1 : m2
13590 : 14634
13610 : 14593
13111 : 12966
13527 : 14730
13498 : 14743
# boundary
nodes
170
183
217
127
135
# cut
links
146
167
231
113
129
ψ
4700.74
3789.65
995.5
3429.92
2934.01
Centralized
time to reach
gap 1E-4 (sec)
149.79
Total DSTAP
warmstarting
time (sec)
78.242
87.56
63.41
77.44
77.91
Fullnet
gap from 1
itr of DSTAP
0.0535
0.0289
0.0161
0.0273
0.0272
32

Table B3.: Goldcoast Network Partition
Goldcoast network (n = 4807, m = 11140)
Partition
Spectral
ψ−FM
Spectral
METISv1
ψ−FM
METISv1
METISv2
ψ−FM
METISv2
n1 : n2
2194 : 2587
2194 : 2587
2421 : 2356
2419 : 2358
2397 : 2384
2396 : 2385
m1 : m2
5108 : 6008
5108 : 6008
5619 : 5474
5615 : 5479
5518 : 5598
5516 : 5599
# boundary
nodes
23
23
35
34
22
23
# cut
links
20
20
33
32
20
21
ψ
241.92
241.92
929.43
415.63
2803.21
2803.21
Centralized
time to reach
gap 1E-4 (sec)
615.11
Total DSTAP
warmstarting
time (sec)
545.85
555.12
545.05
625.9
563.03
513.99
Fullnet
gap from 1
itr of DSTAP
0.0607
0.0598
0.069
0.068
0.0682
0.075
33

Table B4.: Chicago-regional Network Partition
Chicago regional network (n = 12982, m = 39018)
Partition
Spectral
ψ−FM
Spectral
METISv1
ψ−FM
METISv1
METISv2
ψ−FM
METISv2
n1 : n2
6399 : 6580
6405 : 6574
6562 : 6411
6555 : 6418
6352 : 6627
6351 : 6628
m1 : m2
19136 : 19675
19145 : 19673
19289 : 19425
19277 : 19440
19240 : 19627
19229 : 19630
# boundary
nodes
192
195
246
241
152
153
# cut
links
207
200
288
285
151
159
ψ
81512.19
48238.04
12598.71
12598.71
33672.62
32821.14
Centralized
time to reach
gap 1E-4 (sec)
1668.28
Total DSTAP
warmstarting
time (sec)
1558.96
1558.69
4696.46
1568.57
1544.49
1680.52
Fullnet
gap from 1
itr of DSTAP
0.0623
0.0611
0.1077
0.0955
0.0664
0.0744
34

Table B5.: Philadelphia Network Partition
Philadelphia network (n = 13389, m = 40003)
Partition
Spectral
ψ−FM
Spectral
METISv1
ψ−FM
METISv1
METISv2
ψ−FM
METISv2
n1 : n2
4867 : 8522
4863 : 8526
6858 : 6531
6852 : 6537
6734 : 6655
6728 : 6661
m1 : m2
14751 : 25130
14743 : 25147
19798 : 19929
19773 : 19952
20624 : 19223
20606 : 19239
# boundary
nodes
104
107
259
252
152
152
# cut
links
122
113
276
278
156
158
ψ
459897.3
359189.24
367387.31
281971.62
310871.26
278558.5
Centralized
time to reach
gap 1E-4 (sec)
2403.5
Total DSTAP
warmstarting
time (sec)
2354.91
2331.33
2689.24
2418.92
2469.81
2351.194
Fullnet
gap from 1
itr of DSTAP
0.2143
0.0995
0.2937
0.2260
0.8109
0.7226
35
