Dynamic In-node Group-aware Scheduling for
Multi-tenant Machine Learning Services on
Kubernetes
Peini Liu∗†, Jordi Guitart∗†
∗Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
†Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
E-mail: {peini.liu, jordi.guitart}@bsc.es
Abstract—Machine Learning (ML) is becoming pervasive and
integrated into different kinds of businesses. Hosting multi-
tenant ML services on a unified platform requires efficient
orchestration. Service orchestration considers two levels: an in-
cluster scheduling to decide the node allocation, followed by an
in-node scheduling to manage the resource distribution within
the node. Previous works introduced multi-container deploy-
ments for ML services, demonstrating that partitioning the ML
service and enabling CPU/Memory affinity for each container
improves performance. These multi-container deployments have
been enabled for Kubernetes at in-cluster level to allocate
multiple groups of containers across nodes. However, when the
containers are launched in the node, the in-node scheduler
lacks awareness of the group information which challenges
those containers for a fine-grained resource allocation, especially
when multiple groups of containers share the same node. This
paper presents an in-node group-aware scheduling mechanism
for multiple ML services, where each service scheduling contains
a group resource selection and container resource assignment.
Moreover, we also provide a dynamic resource controller (DRC)
to dynamically reallocate the resource allocation for containers
using the mechanism, which monitors the group changes and acts
with the real containers’ system cgroups adaptation. Our results
show that for deploying ML services with the same ML model
and different ML models, DRC throughput outperforms other
deployment scenarios by up to 258% and 319% respectively.
In an experiment deploying a dynamic workload of multiple
mixed ML services, DRC outperforms baseline NONE-Single by
242%, 75%, and 28% for the average throughput of services
with Mobilenet, Resnet50, and VGG16, respectively, and also
DRC results in a makespan 44% faster than NONE-Single and
4% faster than CM-Multi.
Index Terms—Group-aware scheduling, In-node scheduling,
Affinity, ML Services, Cgroup, Kubernetes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, data and artificial intelligence (AI) have been
utilized to empower all different kinds of areas, and more and
more ML services are enabled for multiple businesses such
as autonomous vehicles and transportation, e-commercial,
healthcare, etc. Containerization has emerged as a funda-
mental technology for those services, because it packages
applications with all their dependencies, ensuring portability
across environments. It also improves resource utilization,
flexibility, scalability, and enables agile developments and
deployments within work teams.
Hosting multiple ML services on a unified cognitive
computing continuum requires container orchestrators. The
orchestrator has the capability to launch and manage con-
tainers and their entire lifecycle, while leveraging resource
availability and user requirement specifications to decide the
specific placement of containers. Kubernetes [1] is a dominant
container orchestrator that has been extensively adopted in
commercial production systems, such as Google Kubernetes
Engine [2]. In terms of container scheduling, Kubernetes has
a central scheduler within the control-plane to decide the node
deployment for each Pod (i.e., in-cluster scheduling). Once a
container is assigned to a node, there is a Kubelet agent at
each node to determine how to launch the containers of the
Pod in this node (i.e., in-node scheduling).
A large amount of work has been done with Kubernetes
scheduler at the in-cluster scheduling level [3]–[5] for allo-
cating containers to a node, but they did not consider fine-
grained scheduling at the in-node level. In-node container
scheduling must fine-tune how multiple containers share CPU,
memory, cache, etc., after the orchestrator picks up a node.
Currently, most systems, particularly the default Kubelet,
rely on Linux cgroups and the kernel’s Completely Fair
Scheduler (CFS) to do this in-node scheduling. Moreover,
there exist an advanced Kubelet agent that includes additional
internal resource managers, such as CPU manager, topology
manager, etc., to allocate and isolate in-node resources to each
container. These resource managers ensure that each container
operates within its resource limits by enforcing constraints
through its assigned cgroup. However, the current in-node
container resource allocation has some limitations. First,
it lacks application awareness to consider the relationship
among containers. It also lacks the capability to identify
applications from multiple tenants.
Introducing a dynamic group-aware strategy at the in-node
scheduling level can help to improve system resource uti-
lization and application performance, especially in scenarios
involving multi-container deployments of ML services, by
optimizing the group coordination and resource affinity to en-
able more efficient service scheduling and execution. Several
works [6]–[8] have demonstrated that partitioning the process-
es/threads belonging to an MPI/AI application into multiple
containers can achieve better performance for computation-
65
2025 IEEE 18th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD)
2159-6190/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CLOUD67622.2025.00017
2025 IEEE 18th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD) | 979-8-3315-5557-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CLOUD67622.2025.00017
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

intensive applications, and have experimented with corre-
sponding CPU/memory affinity with multi-container deploy-
ment schemes. [4] has enabled group-aware scheduling for the
Kubernetes scheduler at in-cluster level to allocate multiple
containerized HPC applications among nodes. However, it re-
mains challenging at in-node scheduling level to fine-tune the
resource allocation for a group of containers belonging to a
ML service, especially considering fine-grained CPU/memory
affinity for each container. Moreover, when there are multiple
ML services sharing the node, balancing among groups of
containers belonging to each service is also challenging.
To this end, this paper presents a dynamic in-node group-
aware scheduling, which can adapt the containers’ cgroups
considering the application container group awareness at
runtime. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We enable multi-container deployment schemes for
multi-tenant ML services on Kubernetes.
• We propose an in-node group-aware scheduling mech-
anism, which has the capability to provide balanced
node resources among groups, and then enable resource
affinity for containers within a group.
• We propose a dynamic resource controller (DRC) for
controlling containers’ cgroups, where a node agent is
actively reacting to multiple group changes and updating
containers’ cgroups within this group accordingly.
• We evaluate DRC in a real Kubernetes environment for
deploying homogeneous and heterogeneous multiple ML
services. Also, we conduct DRC to deploy dynamic
workloads comprising mixed ML services.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Container and Container Orchestration
Containerization is a lightweight virtualization technology
that builds upon resource isolation and limitation features
of the Linux kernel, such as namespaces and cgroups,
respectively. Currently, containers are widely used to pack
applications because of the benefits of portability, isolation,
and high availability.
Numerous platforms support container orchestration, with
Kubernetes [1] being dominant in the computing system. Ku-
bernetes supports the orchestration of containers and provides
resource management for its minimal unit Pod. From the
users’ perspective, they can submit simple specifications of
applications that are encapsulated into containers and wrapped
as Pods to be deployed in the nodes. From the providers’
perspective, all the nodes and resources are controlled by
Kubernetes. Upon receiving a deployment request, default
Kubernetes scheduler [9] checks the Pod resource require-
ments, and selects the node (using a scheduling policy to filter
and rank nodes) to run each Pod. Moreover, there are many
custom schedulers in Kubernetes [3], for instance network-
aware scheduling [5], telemetry-aware scheduling [10], disk-
aware scheduling [11], and load-aware scheduling [12].
Some custom schedulers (e.g., Volcano, Ray) enable Gang
scheduling in Kubernetes, ensuring that a group of related
Pods only start when all required resources are available [13]
[14]. Similarly, [4] has enabled group-aware scheduling for
Kubernetes scheduler at in-cluster level to allocate multiple
containerized HPC applications among nodes. However, the
group information is not considered within the node where
the Pods are allocated.
In conclusion, these policies applied for container or-
chestration are at in-cluster level, which aim to select the
node for each Pod, thus the in-node resource allocation is
complementary to these policies in order to fine-tune the
resource sharing of containers.
B. In-node Resource Allocation Policies
In Kubernetes, once the Pod is tagged with a node, the
corresponding Kubelet agent in that node will take this infor-
mation to launch the Pod on the selected node. By default,
Kubelet does not enable specific Pod resource isolation, thus
all Pods can use any resource in the node but within the
specified resource limits and relying on CFS scheduling.
In addition, native Kubelet supports some features like the
CPU Manager and Topology Manager for more fine-grained
resource allocation: (1) CPU Manager: when configured to
”static”, Kubelet will enable CPU pinning for containers that
request whole CPU cores [15]; (2) Topology Manager: pro-
vides Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)-aware resource
allocation, ensuring that CPU and memory resources are allo-
cated on the same NUMA socket for improved performance.
It can be set as ”best-effort” or ”single-NUMA-node” [16].
Additionally, Kubernetes v1.27 released an alpha feature to
enable in-place resource resizing for Kubernetes Pods [17].
Moreover, some custom policy enhancements have been
developed in Cloud providers, such as HUAWEI Cloud, which
provides an enhanced CPU policy that supports burstable
pods allowing them to use certain CPUs to ensure application
stability preferentially [18]. Also, Google Cloud highlights the
performance benefits of implementing NUMA-aware schedul-
ing to optimize resource allocation and reduce memory access
latency, and the tradeoffs between optimizing for NUMA
performance and reducing cache contention [19].
However, each of those Pods now is considered as an
independent unit for in-node resource provisioning, thus none
of the in-node scheduling policies considers the relationship
of multiple Pods belonging to an application and establishes
a group for them to enable holistic scheduling.
C. In-node Multi-container Deployments
Considering the Pods dependencies of an application can
benefit several scenarios, a typical one is a multi-container
deployment for HPC/AI applications which partitions the
application processes or threads into multiple containers [20].
Some performance analyses [6] [7] indicate that an MPI appli-
cation with multi-container deployment schemes can achieve
better performance, and that setting CPU/Memory affinity
for the containers help. Their latest work [8] presented the
performance benefit of utilizing multi-container deployment
schemes for an AI application and also the advantages of
66
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 1. Different deployment scenarios.
enabling CPU/Memory affinity for those containers on a
Kubernetes cluster. However, this work uses Kubelet default
policy and customized static policy to assign the containers’
cpuset.cpus to a range of CPUs within a node before bench-
marking, which does not have the ability to monitor a group
of containers and adjust the CPU range allocation at runtime.
Moreover, it did not evaluate multi-tenant ML services.
Some other works [21] [22] analyzed far-memory, where a
custom scheduler could be aware of the memory bottleneck
and change the cgroup of the memory node without changing
the total amount of memory available. The improved swap
system Fastswap and the cluster scheduler provide support for
cluster-wide far memory, however the scheduler is customized
and does not support containers.
Even though these works do not directly show how to
update the cgroup of a container, they highlight some sce-
narios where updating cgroups (e.g., especially for a range
of CPU/memory cpuset.cpus, cpuset.mems) will potentially
provide good performance for applications.
In conclusion, current in-node resource allocation requires
a scheduling policy that considers the application-awareness
of multiple containers established as a group and the support
for fine-tuning deployments of multi-tenant ML services for
holistic scheduling. In addition, it requires a dynamic resource
controller that can actively monitor a group event and react
with a cgroups update.
III. BASICS OF DEPLOYMENT SCENARIOS
The basic deployment models for ML services are intro-
duced in Figure 1. In this paper, we contrast single-container
with multi-container deployments for an ML service, as well
as single- vs. multi-tenant scenarios. In this section, first we
define these scenarios (shown in the top part of Figure 1) and
then we present different deployment schemes (shown in the
bottom part of Figure 1).
• Single-container
vs.
Multi-container:
A
single-
container deployment is the basic deployment for an
ML service, where the scheduler allocates resources
to the service runtime and the runtime schedules the
workers to use them. A multi-container deployment
for an ML service is considered for more fine-grained
resource allocation, where the ML service can distribute
its load into multiple backends, and the scheduler can
allocate resources to each of the containers. Detailed
thread partition and resource allocation for multiple
containers can be found in [8].
• Single-tenant vs. Multi-tenant: A single-tenant scenario
refers to an ML service on a platform without resource
sharing with other ML services from other tenants.
Whereas, a multi-tenant scenario means that ML services
from different tenants are sharing resources from the
same platform.
In this paper, we consider a multi-tenant in-node schedul-
ing, hence our platform will be a single node that is shared
by multiple ML services from different tenants, and the
objective is to efficiently deploy multiple groups of containers.
The bottom part of Figure 1 shows examples of different
deployment schemes for multiple groups of containers, which
are detailed below. As an example, we deploy two ML
services in a node with 16 cores and 2 NUMA sockets.
• None-Single: Each group (i.e., service) has only one con-
tainer that specifies a CPU request of 8. Each container
can use 8 CPUs from all the 16 available cores. The CFS
scheduler makes the in-node scheduling.
• CM-Single: Each group has only one container that
specifies a CPU request of 8. Each container is assigned
the requested amount of resources with CPU/Memory
affinity (e.g., 8 dedicated cores, memory from a single
NUMA socket). The Kubelet policy makes the resource
pinning for each container.
• None-Multi: Each group has multiple containers, in
this example 8 containers, each one requesting 1 CPU.
Similar as NONE-Single, each container can request 1
CPU from all 16 CPUs. The CFS scheduler does the
in-node scheduling.
• CM-Multi: Each group has multiple containers (i.e., 8
containers, each one requesting 1 CPU). Each container
is assigned resources with CPU and memory affinity
67
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 2. System architecture for resource allocation on Kubernetes.
(e.g., 1 dedicated core and memory from a single NUMA
socket). The Kubelet policy assigns resources to each
container based on their startup sequence and allocates
CPU cores in numerical order without group awareness.
However, enabling group-aware scheduling for multi-
container deployments in a multi-tenant scenario is important
because of two considerations. First, multi-tenant groups
can be heterogeneous (i.e., different ML models), and this
diversity creates different resource contention on the shared
node, especially in cache and memory bandwidth. If the
system allocates resources unevenly to the group, it may lead
to inconsistent performance degradation in different NUMA
sockets. Second, multiple containers in the same group are ho-
mogeneous with a synchronized life-cycle, generating system
loads together. Resource balancing is also important because
the system load will significantly change in the node once a
group is added or deleted, especially in a dynamic scenario.
To this end, our DRC Policy aims to enable group aware-
ness for the dynamic multi-tenant multi-container scenario.
For each scheduling step, it first selects resources for a
group ensuring load balancing among NUMA sockets, and
then allocates resources to containers within that group using
resource affinity for efficient resource usage. DRC module
and policy are explained in detail in Section IV.
IV. DYNAMIC RESOURCE CONTROLLER
In this section, we first introduce a system architecture for
resource allocation on Kubernetes. After that, we present the
Dynamic Resource Controller (DRC) module, and define its
sensors and actuators, and finally we propose a group-aware
scheduling strategy and enable dynamic cgroup control.
A. System Architecture
Figure 2 presents the system architecture for resource
allocation on Kubernetes. First, it shows how Kubernetes
deploys Pods, that is, a user specifies an application, then
the controller manager wraps the application as a single or
multiple Pods and the scheduler decides the node placement
of these Pods. Once those Pods are assigned to a node, the
Kubelet agent in each node will utilize its CPU/Topology
Manager to decide resource usage and start the Pod by calling
the container runtime to create cgroups for allocating specific
resources.
DRC works after the first Pod initialization thus has no
conflict with Kubelet. As shown in the right of Figure 2, the
DRC module operates as a node agent which can provide
dynamic in-node group-aware scheduling. From an abstract
point of view, its primary role is to continuously watch
changes at both the application and the infrastructure layers,
automatically triggering group-aware scheduling policy to
adapt to those changes by holistically allocating resources for
applications. In particular, after an application is allocated to
a node by the Kubernetes scheduler, the in-node DRC will
balance resources among multiple application groups, and
will also enable resource allocation adjustment by changing
cgroup settings of containers within an application group.
This mechanism is especially critical for a multi-container
deployment scenario and in multi-tenant environments, where
resource sharing is common. The dynamic and fine-grained
management of resource allocations among application groups
and within an application group ensures that each container
receives the appropriate resources based on the latest appli-
cation and infrastructure state.
B. Dynamic Resource Controller Module
DRC Module is an agent that dynamically adapts to the
group changes in a node. The detailed sensors and actuators
of the DRC module are explained below.
Table I shows the sensors of DRC from two layers (i.e.,
Application and Infrastructure). In the application layer, the
agent is capable to get two levels of group changes. One is on
the number of ML services, when a new group is generated
or a group is deleted, the policy is triggered to select or
release resources. Another one is on the number of containers
within a group, if the total amount of containers reach the
desired numbers within the group, the policy is triggered
68
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TABLE I
DRC SENSORS
Layer
Metrics
Sensor
Application
Number of groups: Multi-tenant
Number
of
containers:
Multi-
container
Infrastructure
Available CPUs and NUMA socket
resources
TABLE II
DRC ACTUATORS
Control Point
Parameters
Actuator
cpuset
cpuset.cpus
cpuset.mems
to select resources for the group and allocate resources to
containers within the group. In the infrastructure layer, the
current available CPUs/memory resources and the resource
topology information is able to be monitored.
Table II shows the actuators of DRC, which is responsible
for adjusting the cgroups control of all containers within the
node. In practice, editing the cgroup is not recommended be-
cause it may interfere with Kubernetes’ resource management.
However, we noticed that native Kubernetes only decides on
the total amount of the CPU/memory resources allocated to
a container. Our proposed actuators will not use DRC to
control the total amount of resources but the specific allocated
resources, hence there will be no conflict. Given the benefit we
see in the literature to use the proper CPU/memory affinity,
we propose to have control points on the CPUSET, where
the containers can use a range of CPUs and specific memory
nodes.
C. Dynamic Group-aware Scheduling Mechanism
Finally, we propose a group-aware scheduling mechanism
for the deployment of ML services using the sensors and
actuators mentioned in Section IV-B. The notations used for
explaining the problem and algorithms are shown in Table III.
In theory, the proposed group-aware scheduling mecha-
nisms can be enabled by any container orchestrator at in-node
level by changing the implementation of the sensor to get
information of groups and the actuator to adapt the containers’
cpuset. However, in this work, we focus on the Kubernetes
platform, given its dominance in container orchestration.
We assume a Cloud platform (e.g., Kubernetes) shared by
different tenants to provide their ML model as a ML service.
Hence, we have all the ML services (from different tenants)
S = Sn
i=1 Si. For each ML service Si, we enable both single-
or multiple- container deployment, allowing the service to be
deployed as a container group Gi. The container group is
defined as Gi = Sm
j=1 pi,j, consisting of multiple Pods in the
Kubernetes concept. The objective is to find for G and P the
resource allocations MG and MP .
The initial scheduling for ML services S is handled by
Kubernetes, where the default scheduler selects nodes for
TABLE III
NOTATION TABLE.
Notation
Explanation
S
A set of ML services.
G
A set of PodGroups.
P
A set of Pods.
Si
Service i.
Gi
PodGroup i.
pi,j
Pod j in Service i.
A
Pod CPU request.
E
Replicaset Event
N
Topology information.
U
Available CPUs and Memory resources
with topology information.
L
System Pod cgroup path.
C
A set of Cgroups, each cgroup has its
cpuset-cpus and cpuset-mems.
CG
A set of Cgroups for PodGroups.
CG = {C1, C2, . . . , Ci}
CP
A set of Cgroups for Pods.
CP = {C1, C2, . . . , Ci}
MG :
mg
7→
(cpuset-cpus, cpuset-mems)
Mapping of podgroup i allocated to a
cgroup of cpuset-cpus, and cpuset-mems.
MP :
mp
7→
(cpuset-cpus, cpuset-mems)
Mapping of pod j in group i allocated to a
cgroup of cpuset-cpus, and cpuset-mems.
multiple groups of Pods. The Kubelet then launches the Pods
on the assigned node, so that the node has a set of init cgroups
C to control the resource allocation for each Pod.
Algorithms 1 to 3 specify the overall group-aware schedul-
ing algorithm. The DRC uses them to dynamically reschedule
the cgroups (especially cpuset.cpus, cpuset.mems) for each
group Gi and Pods within the group pi,j.
Algorithm 1 Group-aware Scheduling Algorithm
Input: Running pods P. Topology info (NUMA sockets,
available CPU list) N. Real-time event of Replicaset E.
Output: A group of P with updated set of cgroups C of CPU
and memory allocations.
1: Initialize: U ←SetCPUsList(N)
2: Initialize: S
3: while replicaset event e ∈E do
4:
Si ←Replicaset
5:
if e.type == ”added” or ”modified” then
6:
if Si.replicas == Si.available replicas then
7:
Gi ←grouppods w label("dyn-cpuset",Si)
8:
MGi[MPi,j], U
←
pro-
cess cgroups allocation(Gi,U).
▷
Algorithm
2: Cgroups Reallocation for PodGroup Policy
9:
add service(S,Si,MGi[MPi,j])
10:
end if
11:
else if e.type == ”deleted” then
12:
U ←release cgroups allocation(Si,MGi[MPi,j]))
13:
delete service(S,Si)
14:
end if
15: end for
Algorithm 1 is the main scheduling algorithm within the
DRC. First, the DRC has information of the node topology
69
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

N, available CPUs/memory resources with NUMA socket
topology information U, and initialized service S. Then, the
DRC continuously watches the group changes: when there
is a new service added, Kubernetes will process an initial
deployment; when the service is deleted the resources will be
released. More importantly, when each group is ready with its
number of Pods, DRC aggregates all the Pods for the group
and calls for a cgroups reallocation for the group and the
pods, as shown in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Cgroups Reallocation for PodGroup Policy
Input: Pod Groups Gi; Available CPUs U with NUMA
topology.
Output: Updated Cgroup allocations: a list of mapping
MGi[MP ].
1: Get total CPU request of the Group: Aj = P
p∈Gi rp
2: Evenly distribute Aj across the NUMA sockets:
1) Let N = {N1, N2, . . . , Nk} be the NUMA sockets.
2) Assign ⌊Aj/k⌋or ⌈Aj/k⌉CPUs to each node,
respecting node capacity.
3) Select specific CPU cores from each node to mini-
mize fragmentation.
4) Store assigned CPUs for group Gi in MGi[mgi]
3: for each pod pi,j ∈Gi do
4:
Compute pi,j’s share of Gi’s Cgroup allocation:
cpuset.cpuspi,j =
MGi[mgi]7→cpuset.cpus
len(Gi)
cpuset.memspi,j =
MGi[mgi]7→cpuset.mems
len(Gi)
5:
Update
MPi,j
with
assigned
cpuset.cpus
and
cpuset.mems:
MPi,j[mpi,j] ←cpuset.cpuspi,j, cpuset.memspi,j
6: end for
7: AllocateCgroups(Gi,MG[MP ]). ▷Algorithm 3: Con-
tainer Cgroups Assignment
U ←U - MGi[MPi,j]
8: return MGi[MPi,j], U
Algorithm 2 shows the cgroup reallocation for a group of
pods. It contains two stages for the allocation, first, select
resources for the group, and then assign resources for each
pod within the group. In the group resource selection stage,
we begin by aggregating the resource requests of all Pods
within the group to determine the total demand (line 1). Next,
resources are evenly allocated from all NUMA sockets to the
group (line 2), ensuring that the selected resources align with
the available resources and system NUMA topology. Once
the group’s resources are reserved, the policy further enables
CPU and memory affinity for each Pod (line 3-5), so each
Pod is allocated with new specific cgroups (i.e., cpuset.cpus,
cpuset.mems).
Algorithm 3 shows the actuator to do the final cgroups as-
signment. First, the DRC should get the pod and get and filter
its cgroups path (line 3). This implementation can be different
within different platforms. For Kubernetes the Pod cgroups
will be in /sys/fs/cgroup/kubepods.slice/, and
should be filtered with the ids. Finally, overwrite new cgroups
allocation from Algorithm 2 to the corresponding cgroups. To
note, this path should also be mounted to the DRC agent in
order to enable the final action.
Algorithm 3 Container Cgroups Assignment
Input: Pod Groups Gi, Cgroups mapping for pod group
MGi[MPi,j] : mp 7→(cpuset-cpus, cpuset-mems)
Output: Updated container CPU and memory allocations
1: mpi,j ←MGi[MPi,j]
2: for each pod pi,j ∈Gi do
3:
Lpi,j ←GetSystemCgroupsPath(pi,j)
4:
Allocate pi,j’s Cgroups allocation:
Lcpuset.cpuspi,j = MP i,j : mpi,j 7→cpuset.cpus
Lcpuset.memspi,j = MP i,j : mpi,j 7→cpuset.mems
5: end for
V. EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate our DRC system and the
group-aware scheduling mechanism on top of the Kubernetes
platform. The DRC agent is able to perform dynamic fine-
grained cpu/memory allocation for image classification ML
inference services on a node.
A. Experimental Settings
Hardware: Our experiments are executed on a machine
with 2x Intel® Xeon® Platinum 8360Y CPU @ 2.40GHz,
256 GB RAM. Each CPU has 36 physical cores and with
simultaneous multi-threading disabled and with the governor
for the dynamic voltage and frequency scaling set to a fixed
maximum frequency in mode ’performance’.
Software: The machine runs Ubuntu 22.04 (64 bits) with
host kernel 6.5.0-44-generic. The Kubernetes platform is built
through minikube with Kubernetes version v1.28.14, with
docker v27.2.0 as driver. Models’ directory is mounted to the
minikube container. Minikube starts with two different set-
tings for the in-node Kubelet. Detailed settings for scenarios
NONE and CM are listed in Table IV. 65 cores are available
for Kubernetes applications, others are reserved for system
processes and Kubernetes core services. Our DRC can use up
to 1 core, we can dedicate 64 cores for serving multi-tenant
ML services.
TABLE IV
MINIKUBE KUBELET SETTINGS
Scenario
Settings
None
–extra-config=kubelet.system-reserved=cpu=4
–extra-config=kubelet.kube-reserved=cpu=3
–extra-config=kubelet.cpu-manager-policy=none
CM
–extra-config=kubelet.system-reserved=cpu=4
–extra-config=kubelet.kube-reserved=cpu=3
–extra-config=kubelet.reserved-cpus=0-3,68-70
–extra-config=kubelet.cpu-manager-policy=static
–extra-config=kubelet.topology-manager-policy=best-effort
Model Serving Services: We choose computer vision
applications with their associated reference models. Example
vision applications include photo searches, object sorting,
70
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF USED MODEL
Model
Single Stream Latency (CPU)
Parameters
Depth
Features
MobileNet
10-30ms
4.3 million
55
Optimized for low-latency, edge, and mobile applications
ResNet-50
50-200ms
25.6 million
107
Balances accuracy and latency, high computational cost
VGG-16
500ms-1s
138.4 million
16
High accuracy; high latency; computationally expensive; memory-intensive
and object detection. In particular, we use well-known vision
models Resnet50, MobileNet, and VGG-16 from Keras appli-
cations [23]. Their basic information and features as shown
in Table V. As the serving runtime we choose Tensorflow
Serving. For single-container deployments we let the runtime
to utilize the default setting, whereas for multi-container
deployments we use the methods from this paper [8] to
establish resource and threads splitting among containers.
In this paper, each service is a tenant that is capable of
serving multiple requests and demands 16 cores in all kinds
of deployment scenarios.
Client: The client we use is ab [24] – Apache HTTP
server benchmarking, which can particularly show how many
requests per second our model service is capable of serving.
We set the concurrency requests to 128, 96, and 64 for
MobileNet, Resnet50, and VGG-16, respectively, because of
their latency reference.
TABLE VI
SCENARIOS SETTINGS.
Scenarios
Kubelet
Granularity
NONE-Single
default
NONE-Multi
default
multi-container deploy-
ments granularity
CM-Single
–cpu-manager-policy=static
and
–topology-
manager=best-effort
CM-Multi
–cpu-manager-policy=static
and
–topology-
manager=best-effort
multi-container deploy-
ments granularity
DRC
DRC agent with label-aware
cgroup control
multi-container deploy-
ments granularity
Evaluation Deployment Scenarios: We consider five sce-
narios. First of all, NONE is the baseline scenario, which uses
the default settings of Kubernetes thus without containers’ in-
node resource isolation, meaning all containers will have as
cpuset the entire node. As for CM scenario, we enable default
Kubelet CPU management to explore CPU/memory affinity
for each container. Detailed Kubelet settings are in Table IV.
By default, a ML service uses a single-container deploy-
ment, we record them as scenario Single. However, given
the benefit of using multi-container deployments for online
learning services [8], we also enabled Multi scenarios by
splitting the services into multiple containers while reducing
the corresponding number of threads. Note that, the total
amount of requested resources are the same for both scenarios.
Scenario DRC maintains the benefits of the multi-container
deployment granularity and CPU/memory affinity, and en-
ables our proposed cgroup scheduling and assignment al-
gorithms (see Algorithms 1-3) in the infrastructure Kubelet.
Summarizing, the settings of the five scenarios are as shown
in Table VI.
B. Experiment 1: Deployment of multi-tenant services serving
the same type of ML model
Firstly, we set an experiment with a single type of ap-
plication (i.e., MobileNet). In this experiment, we deploy 4
ML services each requesting 16 cores in all 5 deployment
scenarios. Each service has a client continuously sending
image processing requests at a concurrency level 128. The
clients come with an arrival time interval of 5s and run for 30s.
The entire experiment is repeated 10 times. The throughput
and latency of these services are shown in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Experiment 1: Throughput and latency of 4 MobileNet services.
As shown in the plots, NONE-Single and NONE-Multi have
low requests per second (RPS) compared to other scenarios.
This is because in the NONE-* scenarios, a single container
starts on all CPUs within the host, the Tensorflow Serving
runtime creates as many threads as visible CPUs (i.e., 72)
within this container but (on average) only 16 cores can be
used by each container in NONE-Single and only 1 core can
be used by each container in NONE-Multi, respectively. Thus,
compared to CM-* scenarios, where a single container starts
on 16 cores and threads, or multiple containers start on 1 core
71
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

and thread, NONE-* have more CPU migrations and context
switches among more threads. This is a significant reason that
CM-* outperform NONE-* up to 258%. Another factor which
contributes to the performance improvement is the CPU and
memory affinity. In scenarios CM-*, containers are bound to
specific CPUs and a memory node, thus have better cache
utilization (less L3 misses), more local memory accesses, and
less remote memory accesses than NONE-* scenarios.
When enabling multi-container deployments granularity,
we partition each service within a large number of containers,
but fewer number of threads per container. CM-Multi is
configured with a granularity of 16 containers per service,
the total CPU requirement per container becomes equivalent
to a single core. By assigning each container to a dedicated
CPU (explicitly pining their threads to the core), we avoid
threads migration and context switches, thus containers can
exploit the CPU better. This is demonstrated from the results
where CM-Multi has 137%-146% performance improvement
regarding CM-Single.
We also see in the results that DRC throughput outperforms
CM-Multi up to 9.8%. This improvement comes from the
difference of how resources are allocated. In CM-Multi, by de-
fault the Kubelet enables the cpu-manager/topology-manager
and treats each container as an isolated deployment unit and
statically assigns a group of CPUs and memory to each
container when it is generated. This static allocation ignores
the relationships among containers belonging to the same
services. In contrast, DRC leverages Pod label to identify
groups of related containers. It first reserves the CPU and
memory resources for the entire group and then distributes
them among the containers that comprise it. Through this
group-aware approach, DRC can keep the benefit of using
CPU and memory affinity for containers within a group, and
dynamically ensure that resources among groups are carefully
balanced from the system.
C. Experiment 2: Deployment of multi-tenant services serving
different types of ML models
Secondly, we set an experiment with different types of ML
applications (i.e., 1 application of MobileNet and VGG16,
and 2 applications of Resnet50). The settings are the same
as experiment one, except for the client requests concurrency
levels of the different services, namely 128 for MobileNet,
96 for Resnet50, and 64 for VGG16, respectively, due to
the latency reference of the different models. The entire
experiment is repeated 10 times. The throughput and latency
of these services are shown in Figure 4.
For model mobilenet, resnet50 1, resnet50 2, and vgg16,
NONE-Multi vs. NONE-Single has performance difference of
91%, -7%, -3% and -8%, respectively. Only mobilenet shows
better performance in the NONE-Multi because it is a more
lightweight model in comparison to the others. Even if multi-
ple containers create more threads for using resources, those
threads can spend more time doing productive computation
and less time waiting on shared locks or cache lines. However,
for a heavier model, each thread can place significant pressure
on caches. Larger number of threads from the multi-container
deployment will generate more cache misses causing a lower
CPU utilization. In addition, CM-* scenarios are better than
NONE-* up to 319% because in CM-* scenarios the deploy-
ment scheme defines the appropriate number of threads and
the CPU and memory affinity for each container instead of
using the default settings as done in NONE-*.
CM-Multi has a performance improvement of 241%, 17%,
and 15%, and a performance degradation of -19% for models
mobilenet, resnet50 1, resnet50 2, and vgg16, respectively,
compared to CM-Single. CPU-intensive small models such
as Mobilenet and Resnet50 show better RPS in CM-Multi,
because multi-container deployments allow to exploit the
CPU affinity better avoiding inefficient thread migrations
and context switches. However in a multi-tenant context,
CM-Multi will incur more resource usage in shared cache
and memory than CM-Single for complex memory-intensive
models such as VGG16. Those containers are more vulnerable
to the performance impact of shared cache and memory
contention.
Fig. 4. Experiment 2: Throughput and latency for a mix of 4 services.
DRC shows a performance improvement of 5%, 16%,
13%, and 6% for models mobilenet, resnet50 1, resnet50 2,
and vgg16 regarding CM-Multi. This is essentially because
DRC better balanced the pod groups within the system. On
the one hand, multi-tenant ML services can benefit from
the CPU and memory affinity to enhance CPU usage as in
CM-Multi. However, DRC can balance Pod groups among
NUMA sockets, which can balance overall cache and memory
contention among all multi-tenant collocated services, thus
contributing to the overall performance.
72
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

D. Experiment 3: Deployment of a dynamic workload of
multi-tenant services serving different types of ML models
Finally, we assess the effectiveness of our DRC agent and
the group-aware resource allocation policy for scheduling a
dynamic workload of ML services with different types of
models. Instead of executing only 4 services co-located in
a node within a given time period and statically evaluating
the group-aware scheduling policy, this experiment explores a
more dynamic scenario with changing groups. In this setting,
multiple ML services arrive at different time and serve a given
amount of requests.
In particular, we generated a total of 12 ML services
distributed evenly across three ML models—ResNet50, Mo-
bileNet, and VGG16—resulting in four service instances per
model type. ML services run with a random sequence, and
we appended priorityClass to keep the order of services in
all deployment scenarios. This setup can be further enhanced
by employing a gang-scheduling approach, ensuring sufficient
resources are allocated for all pods of a ML service before the
scheduler applies their placement. Moreover, each service of
one type of model will serve a given amount of requests. The
client requests concurrency levels remain the same as used
in Experiment 2: MobileNet, Resnet50, and VGG16 services
with concurrent requests of 128, 96, and 64, respectively.
Figure 5 shows the average throughput of different types of
services. DRC outperforms baseline NONE-Single by 242%,
75%, and 28% for Mobilenet, Resnet50, and VGG16, re-
spectively. This is because most of the performance insights
obtained in the previous experiments still hold for the DRC
with a larger amount of services.
Fig. 5. Experiment 3: Average throughput of different types of services.
The details of the runs can be seen in Figure 6. First,
this experiment shows that DRC works in a dynamic envi-
ronment. The DRC is capable of sensing the group changes
(e.g., application added, deleted and composed by multiple
containers) and reacts with the cgroup adaptation by using
the group-aware scheduling policy. Also, the makespan shows
that DRC is 44% faster than None-Single baseline scenario
because of several benefits that we analyzed before (i.e.,
number of threads, CPU and memory affinity and multi-
container deployment, as well as the pod group-aware load-
balancing). These can be demonstrated from the results where
NONE-Single is 19% faster than CM-Single, CM-Multi is 28%
faster than CM-Single, DRC is 4% faster than CM-Multi.
Fig. 6.
Dynamic workload experiment: Makespan of serving multiple
different services.
73
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have first analyzed and introduced various
deployment scenarios, then we have presented an in-node
group-aware scheduling policy, which considers two stages
of scheduling (i.e., group resource selection and pod resource
assignment), and finally we have proposed DRC - a Dynamic
Resource Controller for Kubernetes - that dynamically man-
ages Pods cgroups. DRC is composed by sensors to detect
the group changes, the proposed policy to determine new
cgroups and reallocate cgroups of containers accordingly.
In the scenario with a dynamic workload of multiple ML
services, the proposed scheduling with DRC is up to 44%
faster than the basic None-Single baseline.
Several aspects are worth discussing. First, the presented
scheduling policy can be adapted to other orchestration plat-
forms by changing the implementation of group sensing in
the service deployment, and actuator to enforce the cgroups
changes. Second, even though currently our evaluation of
DRC is within one node, DRC is a node agent and has the
capability to scale to different nodes as well. Finally, as we
mentioned this in-node scheduling is complementary to the
in-cluster scheduling, thus it could be interesting to combine
the two-level scheduling (i.e.,
this work and also the work
[4], which introduces the group-aware scheduling in a cluster)
in a large-scale experiment.
Furthermore, we also infer that our strategy together with
multi-container deployments can be advantageous for a wide
range of computation-intensive workloads, not limited to
image classification ML models but also others such as natural
language processing (e.g., Transformer models). Future work
may involve analyzing additional system resources—such as
network and storage I/O—that can also impact the perfor-
mance of ML services in some cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is financed by the EU-HORIZON programme
under
grant
agreements
EU-HORIZON
GA.101092646,
EU-HORIZON MSCA GA.101086248, by Generalitat de
Catalunya (AGAUR) GA.2021-SGR-00478, and the Spanish
Ministry of Science (MICINN), the Research State Agency
(AEI) and European Regional Development Funds (ERD-
F/FEDER) PID2021-126248OB-I00, MCIN/AEI/10.13039/
501100011033/FEDER, UE.
REFERENCES
[1] Kubernetes,
“Production-Grade
Container
Orchestration,”
2022.
[Online]. Available: https://kubernetes.io/
[2] Google, “Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE),” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine
[3] Z. Rejiba and J. Chamanara, “Custom scheduling in kubernetes:
A survey on common problems and solution approaches,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 7, Dec. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544788
[4] P. Liu and J. Guitart, “Fine-grained scheduling for containerized hpc
workloads in kubernetes clusters,” in 2022 IEEE 24th Int Conf on
High Performance Computing
Communications; 8th Int Conf on
Data Science
Systems; 20th Int Conf on Smart City; 8th Int Conf
on Dependability in Sensor, Cloud
Big Data Systems
Application
(HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2022, pp. 275–284.
[5] J. Santos, C. Wang, T. Wauters, and F. De Turck, “Diktyo: Network-
aware scheduling in container-based clouds,” IEEE Trans. on Netw.
and Serv. Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, p. 4461–4477, Apr. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2023.3271415
[6] P. Liu and J. Guitart, “Performance comparison of multi-container
deployment schemes for HPC workloads: an empirical study,” Journal
of Supercomputing, vol. 77, pp. 6273–6312, 2020.
[7] ——, “Performance characterization of containerization for HPC work-
loads on InfiniBand clusters: an empirical study,” Cluster Computing,
vol. 25, pp. 847–868, 2022.
[8] P. Liu, J. Guitart, and A. Taherkordi, “Performance characterization
of multi-container deployment schemes for online learning inference,”
in 2023 IEEE 16th International Conference on Cloud Computing
(CLOUD), 2023, pp. 330–340.
[9] Kubernetes, “Kubernetes Scheduler,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/kube-scheduler/
[10] Intel Corporation, “Telemetry-aware scheduling,” https://github.com/
intel/platform-awarescheduling, 2020, enabling Kubernetes to Make
Intelligent Pod Placement Decisions with Platform Telemetry. [Online;
accessed 2023-08].
[11] Kubernetes
SIGs,
“Disk
i/o-aware
scheduling
(kep-624),”
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/tree/master/
kep/624-disk-io-aware-scheduling, 2023, [Online; accessed 2023-08].
[12] ——, “Trimaran: Real load-aware scheduling (kep-61),” https://github.
com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/tree/master/pkg/trimaran, 2021,
[Online; accessed 2023-08].
[13] Ray,
“Gang
Scheduling
with
RayJob
and
Kueue,”
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/
examples/rayjob-kueue-gang-scheduling.html
[14] Volcano,
“Plugins:
Gang
scheduling
strategy,”
2024.
[Online].
Available: https://volcano.sh/en/docs/plugins/#gang
[15] Kubernetes, “Control CPU Management Policies on the Node,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/
cpu-management-policies/
[16] ——, “Control Topology Management Policies on a node,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/
topology-manager/
[17] ——,
“Resize
CPU
and
Memory
Resources
assigned
to
Containers,”
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/
tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/
[18] H. Cloud, “Enhanced CPU Policy,” July 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://support.huaweicloud.com/eu/usermanual-cce/cce 10 0552.html
[19] L.
Tang,
J.
Mars,
X.
Zhang,
R.
Hagmann,
R.
Hundt,
and
E. Tune, “Optimizing google’s warehouse scale computers: The numa
experience,” in Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 19th International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
ser. HPCA ’13.
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2013, p. 188–197.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2013.6522318
[20] P. Liu, “Convergence of high performance computing, big data, and
machine learning applications on containerized infrastructures,” Ph.D.
dissertation, UPC, Departament d’Arquitectura de Computadors, Jul
2023. [Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2117/403550
[21] C.
Wang,
Y.
Qiao,
H.
Ma,
S.
Liu,
W.
Chen,
R.
Netravali,
M. Kim, and G. H. Xu, “Canvas: Isolated and adaptive swapping
for
Multi-Applications
on
remote
memory,”
in
20th
USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
23).
Boston, MA: USENIX Association, Apr. 2023, pp. 161–
179. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/
presentation/wang-chenxi
[22] E. Amaro, C. Branner-Augmon, Z. Luo, A. Ousterhout, M. K.
Aguilera, A. Panda, S. Ratnasamy, and S. Shenker, “Can far memory
improve job throughput?” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth European
Conference on Computer Systems, ser. EuroSys ’20.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3342195.3387522
[23] Keras,
“Keras
Applications,”
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//keras.io/api/applications/
[24] Apache, “ab - Apache HTTP server benchmarking tool,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/ab.html
74
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 22:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
