AN ANALYSIS OF WORKLOAD PATTERNS IN
BORG CLOUD CLUSTER TRACES
An Undergraduate Research Scholars Thesis
by
ZENGXIAORAN KANG
Submitted to the LAUNCH: Undergraduate Research ofﬁce at
Texas A&M University
in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the designation as an
UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH SCHOLAR
Approved by
Faculty Research Advisor:
Dr. Dilma Da Silva
May 2022
Majors:
Computer Science
Statistics
Copyright © 2022. Zengxiaoran Kang

RESEARCH COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION
Research activities involving the use of human subjects, vertebrate animals, and/or biohaz-
ards must be reviewed and approved by the appropriate Texas A&M University regulatory research
committee (i.e., IRB, IACUC, IBC) before the activity can commence. This requirement applies
to activities conducted at Texas A&M and to activities conducted at non-Texas A&M facilities
or institutions. In both cases, students are responsible for working with the relevant Texas A&M
research compliance program to ensure and document that all Texas A&M compliance obligations
are met before the study begins.
I, Zengxiaoran Kang, certify that all research compliance requirements related to this Un-
dergraduate Research Scholars thesis have been addressed with my Research Faculty Dr. Dilma
Da Silva prior to the collection of any data used in this ﬁnal thesis submission.
This project did not require approval from the Texas A&M University Research Compli-
ance & Biosafety ofﬁce.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ABSTRACT .........................................................................................
1
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ..........................................................................
3
NOMENCLATURE .................................................................................
4
CHAPTERS
1. INTRODUCTION...............................................................................
5
1.1
Problem Addressed .......................................................................
5
1.2
Related Work ..............................................................................
6
2. GOOGLE BORG QUICK OVERVIEW .......................................................
7
2.1
Borg Units .................................................................................
7
2.2
Borg Architecture .........................................................................
9
2.3
Comparison Between Borg Traces V2 and V3 .......................................... 10
3. DATA OVERVIEW ............................................................................. 14
3.1
Data Table ................................................................................. 14
3.2
Data Process Pipeline ..................................................................... 16
3.3
Data Features Overview .................................................................. 18
4. PROPOSED METHODS ....................................................................... 22
4.1
Clustering.................................................................................. 22
4.2
Regression ................................................................................. 23
4.3
Classiﬁcation .............................................................................. 23
5. RESULTS........................................................................................ 25
5.1
Investigation of Underlying Patterns ..................................................... 25
5.2
The Impact of Insulation on Resource Predictability.................................... 26
5.3
Reverse Engineering on Autopilot System............................................... 28
6. CONCLUSION.................................................................................. 29
REFERENCES ...................................................................................... 30

ABSTRACT
An Analysis of Workload Patterns in Borg Cloud Cluster Traces
Zengxiaoran Kang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
Research Faculty Advisor: Dr. Dilma Da Silva
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
The drastic emergence of dynamic, heterogeneous, and shared cloud computing clusters has
impacted corporations, researchers, and software developers for the past decade. With the aim to
improve further the ﬁeld of cloud data processing and management, it is essential to understand the
workload characteristics of large-scale cloud data centers. We analyze the publicly available trace
data released by Google in 2019, deriving an approach that can be used on other large-scale trace
datasets from industry, such as the recently released data from Microsoft Azure and Alibaba. The
notable workload characteristics of heterogeneity in resource types and usage in the Google traces
suggest a highly dynamic environment, with varying jobs that demand faster and more scalable
scheduling decisions.
In the Google Borg trace dataset, comparing the overall usage of the cluster to its capacity,
the average utilization of the cluster for each tier is overcommitted and demonstrates a frequent
regulation of preemption to achieve its high utilization. Using K-means clustering and Lasso re-
gression, we gain valuable insights into the characteristics of Borg’s scheduling patterns. More-
over, we perform the reverse-engineering technique with supervised classiﬁcation methods to un-
1

derstand the key factors being considered in the latest prediction algorithm for resource demands.
Since scheduling and utilization datasets are tremendously large, we manually sample them down
to an appropriate size. Although the sample size prevents us from generalizing overall trace be-
haviors, the analytical method we describe nonetheless extracts system design insights that can be
useful in scheduling decision-making for large-scale clusters.
2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Contributors
I would like to thank my faculty advisor, Dr. Dilma Da Silva for her guidance and support
throughout the course of this research.
Thanks also go to my friends, colleagues, and the department faculty and staff for making
my time at Texas A&M University a wonderful experience.
And last but certainly not least, thanks go to my family for their inspiration, encouragement,
and endless patience. Without them, none of this would have been possible.
The data used for An Analysis of Workload Patterns in Borg Cloud Cluster Traces was made
publically available by Google in May 2019. The analyses depicted in this thesis were conducted
and completed by myself, independently through the academic year ’21-‘22.
Funding Sources
Undergraduate research was supported by Texas Sea Grant College Program at Texas A &
M University.
This work was made possible in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
Numbers SPX-1919181 and CCF-1934904. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Science Foundation.
3

NOMENCLATURE
TiB
Tebibyte
GB
Gigabytes
PB
Petabytes
CPU
Central processing unit
WSC
Warehouse scale cloud
DoS
Denial-of-service attacks
ALTS
Application-layer transport security
VMs
Virtual machines
RAM
Random access memory
RPCs
Remote procedure calls
UI
User interface
GCU
Google compute units
NCU
Normalized Google compute units
SLOs
Service level objectives
GBM
Gradient boosting algorithm
4

1.
INTRODUCTION
The sheer volume of data storage and usage in the cloud has increased at a tremendous scale,
ranging from gigabytes to petabytes per day. The computing industry has witnessed an explosion of
system log data, sometimes at an overwhelming rate. In contrast, academic researchers are often
confronted by a lack of representative information that can be used to evaluate new approaches
for system optimization. Our analysis of publicly accessible traces [1] may help researchers to
explore patterns underlining workload scheduling in large-scale compute clusters. Through such
exploration, researchers may discover novel approaches for further increasing system performance.
The lack of information from real-world, in-production workloads is not surprising, due to
commercial corporate concerns about revealing their data. There are severe risks, such as the usage
of reverse engineering to discover business secrets (e.g., data center usage, scale, and organization)
and the leakage of private user information. A paper by Mogul et al [2] describes the challenges
from Google’s perspective.
To ensure information security, Warehouse Scale Cloud (WSC) providers, such as Google,
Amazon AWS, and Microsoft Azure, deployed technologies at the hardware level, not limited but
including a restricted number of permitted personnel onto the data center ﬂoor, biometric identi-
ﬁcation, cameras, laser-based intrusion detection systems, etc. [3]. At the software level, WSC
providers employed a custom set of solutions. Some of the must-have standards for trusting work-
load distribution infrastructure included cryptographic computation, data trafﬁc encryption, inter-
nal network protocols, and many specialized constraints (for example, the Google application-layer
transport security (ALTS) targeted the response for detecting the ever-present denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks [3]).
1.1
Problem Addressed
When researchers are involved in improving the efﬁciency of WSC systems, traces are gen-
erated with anonymization (i.e., a data processing technique that removes or modiﬁes personally
5

identiﬁable information) and protected through non-disclosure agreements or employment rela-
tionships. Even when these data traces are made public, without the privilege of collaboration
agreements and the overall system knowledge that comes from them, there are obstacles for a thor-
ough comprehension of their structure, for instance, which project the data is exactly describing
or what speciﬁc system design insights can be extracted from machine attributes. Nonetheless,
our statistical analysis conﬁrms that traces can reveal many valuable insights about the workload
represented.
1.2
Related Work
The problem of how to schedule computing tasks across larger computer clusters to opti-
mize the overall system efﬁciency has been explored for many decades [4, 5]. The use of traces
to identify general and workload-speciﬁc opportunities to improve resource management has been
studied in the context of multiprocessor systems [6, 7, 8], parallel computing [9], and cluster com-
puting [10]. Our work has a different objective: assess if statistical analysis of a trace dataset can
reveal trends in the absence of speciﬁc knowledge of the traced systems.
Most work in the literature uses the Google Borg 2019 dataset [1] to evaluate scheduling
techniques [11, 12, 13]. Our work takes a different route: as done in [14] for a 2011 dataset, we
analyze the dataset in search of patterns not discussed in the original analysis presented by Tirmazi
et. al. [15].
6

2.
GOOGLE BORG QUICK OVERVIEW
Google’s Borg is a large-scale cluster manager that achieves high utilization of comput-
ing resources by combining admission control, efﬁcient task-packing, over-commitment, and ma-
chine sharing with process-level performance isolation[16]. The primary users of Borg are internal
Google developers and system administrators who deploy and monitor Google’s industrial appli-
cations and services. Every day, Borg efﬁciently handles millions of job requests and provides
reliable services to thousands of applications across thousands of machines in assembled clusters.
In 2011, Google published a demo trace V1 and a 1-month trace V2 of Borg, enabling
external researchers to study the scheduling workloads in computing clusters [17]. The work
in this thesis analyzed the latest trace V3 [1], which is a cluster manager log that documents
detailed Borg job scheduling information from 8 different Google compute clusters (Borg cells)
for the entire month of May 2019 [1]. The following chapter introduces Borg’s infrastructure,
scheduling process, and the improvements made from V2 and V3 traces to help understand Borg’s
fundamentals and explain experimental results.
2.1
Borg Units
2.1.1
Tasks & Collections
A job in Borg consists of one or more tasks that all run in the same program, deﬁned by
some general properties (e.g., name, owner, number of tasks in a job) and constraints that force
particular tasks to run on speciﬁc attributes [14]. To avoid extra overhead in virtualization, Borg
maps each task directly to a set of Linux processes running in a container on a machine so that the
majority of the workload does not need to run inside virtual machines (VMs) [18]. A Borg alloc
(short for allocation) reserves resources for one or more tasks on a machine in the future and can
gather similar tasks from different jobs onto the same machine to optimize efﬁciency. A group of
alloc instances forms an alloc set that reserves resources on multiple machines into which users
can schedule additional jobs [14].
7

From a brevity and similarity perspective, "task" refers to an alloc or top-level task, and
"collection" refers to a job or alloc set. Alloc sets only account for 2% of the collections but are
important features for production workloads because Alloc sets represent 20% of the total CPU
allocations and 18% of the RAM [15]. Jobs inside allocs have a higher average memory utilization
(73%) than other jobs (41%) [15].
2.1.2
Cluster & Cells
Each job runs in one Borg cell, which is a single managed unit that consists of a set of
machines. In the V3 trace, the average and median cell size is about 10,000 servers. The machines
in a cell connected through the high-performance datacenter-scale network fabric belonging to a
single cluster [19]. A deﬁned cluster typically hosts one large cell and may optionally equip a
few smaller-scale test or special-purpose cells. Each cluster is inside a data center building, and
a collection of buildings composes a site. Although machines in a cell have heterogeneous ma-
chine features in many dimensions, such as sizes (CPU, RAM) and processor type, Borg hides
the complexity of those differences from users by determining where to run tasks, how to allo-
cate resources, installing necessary dependencies, and monitoring tasks’ health [16]. Figure 2.1
illustrates the relationship between cells, clusters, and data center sites.
Figure 2.1: A relation overview of Borg machines, cells, clusters, and data center sites.
8

2.2
Borg Architecture
Cluster managers take into consideration several aspects of the workload and available
hardware when optimizing system usage; therefore, they can be quite complex. Borg has been
operational for more than a decade and has been evolving to adapt to new trends in the composition
and usage of clusters. This section presents the Borg architecture as documented in the literature
in 2020.
2.2.1
Infrastructure
Borg has a centralized manager called the Borgmaster that is used to control resources on
each cell, and an agent process manager, the Borglet, that runs on each machine in a cell. A
Borglet helps to start, stop, and restart tasks if they fail [16]. Users manage jobs by issuing remote
procedure calls (RPCs) to Borg via a web-based user interface (UI) called Sigma, via which users
can review the state of all jobs [16].
The Borgmaster handles client RPCs by communicating with Borglets and sending feed-
back to Sigma. Together they collaborate to mutate states of jobs (e.g., create jobs), manage states
of objects in the system (e.g., machines, tasks, allocs, etc.), and provide access to a read-only view
of the data (e.g., lookup jobs). In addition, to prevent recovery storms and avoid any manual ﬂow
control mechanism, the Borgmaster polls each Borglet every few seconds to retrieve and verify the
machine’s current state. Therefore, the Borgmaster has full control over the rate of communica-
tion [20].
2.2.2
Workloads
Borg cells run a set of heterogeneous workloads with two main parts [16]: (1) Long-running
services handling short-lived latency-sensitive requests, particularly applied for end-user-facing
products such as Gmail and Google search and (2) Batch jobs that are less sensitive to short-term
performance ﬂuctuations present in come-and-go patterns. Many Google essential application
frameworks have been built on top of Borg, including MapReduce (system specialized in process-
ing and generating large dataset using a cluster of machines) [21], Flume Java (library used to
9

develop, test and run code efﬁciently in parallel pipelines) [22], and Pregel (a large-scale graph
processing computational model) [23].
2.2.3
Scheduler
When users submit a job, the Borgmaster keeps the change log persistently in a Paxos-
based store [24] and appends the job’s tasks to the pending queue. The scheduler operates on
the granularity of a task unit; it scans the queue asynchronously and assigns tasks to machines
modulated in a round-robin scheme that ensures fairness across users and avoids blocking small
tasks behind large ones.
The scheduler algorithm has two parts[16]: (1) feasibility checking ﬁnds the machines
where a task can run; (2) scoring selects which one of the feasible machines is preferred. In
the scoring stage, the criteria were built to minimize the number and priority of preempted tasks
by spreading tasks across power and failure domains and packing quality in a mix of high and
low tasks onto the same machine. However, in practice, a lower-priority task is often evicted or
preempted if a higher-priority task gets assigned to the same resource. Figure 2.2 portrays an
overview of the scheduling process.
2.3
Comparison Between Borg Traces V2 and V3
An extensive comparison in the phenomenon, growth and improvement of Borg from trace
V2 in 2011 to trace V3 in 2019 has been presented in the literature [15] [25][16][26]. There are
two main characteristics to measure and compare CPU and memory resources: requested resource
allocation and actual resource usage. The averages have increased over the years on both CPU and
memory for the best-effort batch and production-tier jobs. In contrast, resource allocation of free-
tier jobs in both scales had a large reduction, while the best-effort batch had a large increment and
is about 20% of the cell’s overall capacity. [15]. Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4 also show improvement
in the stability of CPU and memory across aggregated time (one-hour averages across millions of
machines in 8 cells broken down into tiers.)
As expected, variation in workload across cells and within cells existed. In Figure 2.5 and
10

Figure 2.2: An overview of Borg scheduling process (Picture edited from the paper at EuroSys’15
by Verma et al[16]).
Figure 2.6, even though cell c has a dominant allocation of jobs in the best-effort tier, around 70%
of the average resource usage is consumed by jobs in the production tier. Whereas cell b has about
30% average resource allocation of jobs in the best-effort tier, they account for 50% of the average
resource usage. Regardless of the internal variations across the 8 cells, every cell in the 2019
dataset has a better resource usage and allocation management than the recorded data from 2011.
In addition, Borg’s scheduling workload has increased since 2011. By 2019, the median
job arrival rate increased 3.7 times, and the median task scheduling rate increased 3.6 times [15].
However, many scheduling events commit to rescheduling, and the drastic increase in the ratio
of the resubmitted tasks rate to the new task rate indicates a "churn" phenomenon in the modern
system. The “churn” also suggests Borg’s over-commitment of resources to top production jobs
during scheduling.
11

Figure 2.3: The fraction of a cell’s total resource capacity allocated during each hour-long
interval (Picture from paper at EuroSys’20 by Tirmazi et al.[15]).
Figure 2.4: The fraction of a cell’s total resource capacity used during each hour-long interval
(Picture from paper at EuroSys’20 by Tirmazi et al.[15]).
12

Figure 2.5: Average allocation (as a fraction of cell capacity across the entire trace duration) by
tier, for 2011 and the 8 cells in the 2019 trace (Picture from the paper at EuroSys’20
by Tirmazi et al.[15]).
Figure 2.6: Average utilization (as a fraction of cell capacity across the entire trace duration) by
tier, for 2011 and the 8 cells in the 2019 trace (Picture from the paper at EuroSys’20
by Tirmazi et al.[15]).
13

3.
DATA OVERVIEW
The Google Borg trace V3 is about 2.4TiB compressed and records a wide range of be-
haviors on machines and their schedulers from 8 different Borg cells for May 2019. Each cell’s
trace is stored separately in 8 buckets on Google BigQuery objects [27], particularly focusing on
resource requests and usage. Due to conﬁdentiality, Google uses obfuscation techniques to pro-
tect any sensitive or classiﬁed information. Text ﬁelds are randomly hashed, numeric resources
are linearly transformed, and special values are mapped onto ordered series. However, a thorough
understanding of the trace characteristics is held back by such corporate and commercial concerns.
In recent years, some of the most prominent technology companies have released small
portions of workload traces that capture the behavior of their system in production: Google opened
a repository with three versions (e.g., 7 hr 2011 V1, May 2011 V2, May 2019 V3 [1]) of traces
capturing characteristics of the jobs running on Google compute cells managed by the Borg system;
Microsoft publicly released ﬁve datasets intended to evaluate three major functionalities of Azure
(e.g., VM 2017 & 2019, Packing 2020, Function Invocations 2019 & 2021 [28]) for the beneﬁt of
the research and academic community; Alibaba also published four versions of traces that capture
workload behavior for modern application designs such as micro-services (e.g., VM 2017 & 2018,
GPU 2020, Micro-service 2021 [29, 30]) from real production environments.
In this chapter, we present a study the Borg trace V3 and perform an exploratory analysis.
We also explain some of the constraints, potential impacts, and adjustments made to adapt to the
limited working environment.
3.1
Data Table
Each cell is independently managed by a single Borgmaster and has a corresponding trace
organized into ﬁve data tables. Each record in the table has a timestamp marked 600 seconds be-
fore the beginning of the trace period (recorded in microseconds for consistency.) The accuracy
of timestamps is approximately precise, and small disagreements due to clock drift between ma-
14

chines are tolerated. In the trace, Borg measures and stores memory data by dividing them by the
maximum machine memory size across all traces. Borg measures CPU consumption in an internal
unit called "Google compute units" (GCU), which represents one CPU-core worth of computation
power on a nominal base machine [1]. The trace normalizes GCU with a similar scaling method
applied on memory, which refers to as a Normalized Compute Units (NCU). The content of each
table is concisely summarized as follows [1]:
1. Machine attributes: The table stores key-value pairs describing each machine’s character-
istics in a cell. The values and names are obfuscated strings intended to describe machines’
properties such as the kernel version, external IP address, and other speciﬁed constraints.
This research does not utilize information inside this table because most values are unrecog-
nizable and infeasible to interpret without internal Google documentation.
2. Machine events: This table reﬂects the normalized physical capacity in each dimension
(CPU cores, RAM size) of each machine and their corresponding action events (e.g., Add,
Remove, Update) at a timestamp.
3. Collection events: The table represents the life cycle of collection instances (jobs or alloc
sets). The table includes context-sensitive information but can locate speciﬁc collection
instances in a cell trace with a unique identiﬁer. The table also describes ﬁelds speciﬁc to
the property for collection instance, such as collection type (a job or alloc set) and vertical
scaling type. Vertical scaling is an automatic scheduling service supported by the Autopilot
system [31] that can predict and adjust jobs’ resource limits based on historical data. The
trace indicates if the collection applies no, constrained, or fully automated vertical scaling.
4. Instance events: The table provides actions and life cycle information for instances (tasks
or allocs). The table indicates resource request and constraint ﬁelds that set the limit for the
maximum CPU, memory, and machine attributes an instance permitted to use. The table
also depicts the behaviors of Borg scheduler over-commitment that often throttle or kill low-
priority tasks in preference to maintain good service on high-priority tasks.
15

5. Instance usage: The table records the usage statistics of each task in approximately 5-
minutes windows, obtaining the measurements at intervals of one second. Detailed resource
usages are captured, including average usage observed within the window, an upper bound of
average memory given by the Borglet agent, memory ﬁle page cache by the operating system
kernel, cycles per instruction, and memory accesses per instruction (i.e., CPU or memory
cycles used dividing by the number of executed instructions; only machines equipped with
processor performance counters collect those statistical data).
3.2
Data Process Pipeline
Due to the tremendous dataset size stored in Big Query [27], a few processing steps are
applied (Figure 3.1) to the original data to accommodate the limited working environment. We
deem that the large size of the sample is sufﬁcient to represent the overall trace behaviors and their
underlying characteristics.
Figure 3.1: An overview of the data process pipeline.
Before sampling, the machine-level variation is preliminarily explored on the original ma-
16

chine attributes and machine events tables across cells. After that, designated queries are run on
Big Query to merge collection events, instance events, and instance usage tables on each job iden-
tiﬁer, which is unique to individual cells to obtain information for collection properties, instance
requested information, and usage data recorded at run-time. Then a uniform random sampling is
applied at 1%, and the sample is fetched for additional data processing and analysis on the local
device.
Figures 3.2 and 3.3 summarize the collected sample data. Compared with Figures 2.5
and 2.6, some main characteristics of cells are captured. For example, the best-effort tier jobs in
cell c still have about 60% allocation requests and about 40% in resource usage. Some cells have
disagreements: for example, the total usage of cell b is surprisingly high compared with other cells.
Nevertheless, around 4 million jobs of the sample data should provide enough acknowledgment of
the original trace.
Figure 3.2: Total requested resources of the sample as a fraction of 1% cell capacity among
sample jobs by tier.
17

Figure 3.3: Total resource usage of the sample as a fraction of 1% cell capacity among sample
jobs by tier.
3.3
Data Features Overview
3.3.1
Animals
Previous research discussed a non-negligible phenomenon referred to as "mice and hogs"
[15] (or elephant [25]) in workload scheduling. Both CPU and memory resource in usage and
allocation follow an extreme heavy-tailed power-law Pareto distribution with the alpha parameter
at 0.69 [15]. Log and square root transformations are applied on features to normalized heavy-
tailed bias. Figure 3.4 clearly depicts a clear boundary between hog tasks (with heavy CPU usage)
and mice ones. We aim to answer whether there exists a necessity to insulate the top 1% from the
bottom 99% of jobs. Therefore, segregation labels are assigned to jobs based on their quantiles,
and experiments are developed to determine their signiﬁcance.
18

Figure 3.4: The scatter plot (top) and histogram plot (bottom) of the sample at given labels of
CPU resource quantiles.
Furthermore, besides hog and mice, two animal categories are subjectively selected (Fig-
ure 3.5) based on a primitive intuition of the data distribution: snake and lion. The animals are
a more exhaustive classiﬁcation on higher-level jobs starting above 95% quantiles. Note that
production-tier jobs have a ruling population across percentiles.
Figure 3.5: The scatter plot of CPU usage vs. request on the sample by the animal label at a log
scale. The tier terms (beb, free, mid, prod) are deﬁned in Section 3.3.2.
19

3.3.2
Handling priority
Every task has a priority level mapping into a set of sorted values, ranging from 0 as a lower
priority to 360 or above as a higher priority. The Borg scheduler prioritizes treatment and resource
preferences to high-priority tasks over low-priority tasks. Tasks or jobs with similar priority range
possess similar properties and are referred to as tiers, in general [1]:
• Free tier (priorities <= 99): Jobs with the lowest priorities have no or weak Service Level
Objectives (SLOs); they have no expectations regarding obtaining or occupying resources
on the machine. Typically, they incur no or little internal charges.
• Best-effort Batch (beb) tier (priorities 100 - 115): Jobs are managed by the batch scheduler.
They incur low internal charges and have no associated SLOs.
• Mid-tier (priorities 116 - 119): Jobs in Mid-tier have lower internal charges and weaker
SLOs than jobs in the production tier, and higher internal charges and stronger SLOs than
jobs in the free tier.
• Production tier (priorities 120 - 359): These are jobs with the highest priorities and avail-
ability in the normal setting. Borg schedulers often evict low-priority jobs to transfer storage
and networking privilege to high-priority jobs (most times in the production tier) as they
expect to receive high-quality services [15]. In particular, the Borg scheduler has a rule-
based strategy to prevent latency-sensitive, production-tier tasks from being evicted due to
over-allocation at runtime.
•
Monitoring tier (priorities >= 360): Jobs with the highest priorities are essential to the
infrastructure level and intended to monitor the health of critical services. In this work, the
monitoring tier is considered a part of the production tier due to its small size. A similar
classiﬁcation has been made in prior analysis work [15].
All tasks or jobs have a scheduling class describing their level of latency-sensitivity in
execution. In general, latency-sensitive jobs tend to have higher priorities [1]. Both data collection
20

events and server instance events impact when a machine schedules a task, and the scheduling
class affects the machine-local policy for resource access once the task gets scheduled. The runtime
usage and requested events of each instance are used to construct realistic performance benchmarks
and help improve scheduling management in the cloud.
3.3.3
Cell Capacity
Each cell may be organized to serve a specialized purpose due to the differences in com-
puting capacity. An underlying pattern on resource demands and allocations may be found if ones
dives into the internal variation within cells and machines. However, to the best of our knowledge,
no previous work has conducted a detailed study of statistical inﬂuences of cells’ or machines’
variations in Borg datasets. Figure 3.6 describes the variation in the machine shapes across 8 cells.
Three kinds of machine conﬁgurations occur quite commonly as they can be classiﬁed by low,
medium, and high CPU capacity. Although more insights may be discovered by comparing and
accounting variants at the machine level, this research approximates behaviors in the unit of a cell.
Figure 3.6: Frequency of machine conﬁguration across the 8 cells as a function of CPU and
memory (RAM) capacity. The area of each circle is proportional to the number of
machines appeared in such conﬁguration.
21

4.
PROPOSED METHODS
This chapter introduces the methods applied to the analysis of of the Borg V3 trace. In gen-
eral, they are classiﬁed into three categories according to their functionality: clustering, regression,
and classiﬁcation.
4.1
Clustering
4.1.1
K-means Clustering
K-means clustering is one of the simplest and most popular unsupervised analytical meth-
ods applied in data mining [32]. The unsupervised learning algorithms are capable of capturing
underlying patterns and statistical inferences from numeric datasets without labeled or deﬁned out-
comes. The objective of the K-means algorithm is to group data points with similar characteristics.
K-means can help discover the logistic of allocation of the clusters, which refers to a collection of
the aggregated data points. The K-means algorithm starts by randomly picking a given number of
centroids. Then, iteratively, the K-means will perform squared Euclidean distance calculations to
minimize within-cluster variances and optimize the positions of the centroids until their positions
are stable.
4.1.2
K-mode Clustering
K-Prototype clustering is built based on combining K-mode clustering (i.e., another clus-
tering algorithm designed only for categorical features by encoding categorical values into dummy
variables and grouping data points with similar modes, instead of clusters’ means) and K-means
[33]. Since K-means can only have numeric inputs, the K-Prototype is used to observe impacts
of categorical features as it is a conventional clustering method suitable for data containing both
categorical and numeric inputs.
22

4.2
Regression
4.2.1
Lasso Regression
Lasso regression, also known as L1 regularization, is an extension of ordinal linear regres-
sion that applies a penalty equal to the absolute value of the magnitude of coefﬁcients so that the
coefﬁcients of unimportant features shrink down towards a central point [34]. The regularization
of Lasso towards variable selection enhances the prediction accuracy, as well as the interpretability
of the selected models.
4.2.2
Random Forest Regression
Random forest regression is a supervised learning algorithm that takes advantage of the
“wisdom of the crowds”. The algorithm builds a collection of trees with speciﬁc hyper-parameters
that decide the maximum depth level of a tree, the number of constructed trees, and the minimum
number of samples at the leaf nodes [35]. Each tree in the forest randomly selects a subset of
features as candidates to choose on each level of splits, which prevents trees from overly using the
same set of features. Then each tree will form the best tree to separate splits by giving a random
sample data from the training set. This step introduces an additional element of randomness to pre-
vent over-ﬁtting the original data. Following such an approach, the algorithm randomly constructs
a forest (a set with a predeﬁned number of trees) and asks each tree in the forest to vote based
on individual decision criteria. The voting result is averaged across all predictions as an ensemble
learning process.
4.3
Classiﬁcation
4.3.1
XGBoosting Classiﬁer
Boosting is the process of building a strong classiﬁer from a series of weak classiﬁers.
XGBoost takes advantage of boosting that managed both bias and variance aspects under control
[36]. The new model on each iteration is adjusted to correct the errors on previous models. The
ideal model is formed when no more improvements on accuracy can be progressed when adding
new models sequentially. XGBoost is an extension to gradient boosted decision trees (GBM) with
23

regularization and tree ensemble models to smooth the ﬁnal learned; practically, XGBoost offers
better execution speed and signiﬁcant improvement in model performance than GBM [36].
4.3.2
Random Forest Classiﬁer
The random forest classiﬁcation algorithm works in the same way as the random forest
regression, except the output response is categorical. The algorithm uses bagging and features
randomness on each tree to introduce randomness and prevent overloading. As the algorithm
progresses in each tree construction, the unbiased estimate of generalization error is minimized.
Moreover, the result decided by the committee of the uncorrelated forest of trees outperforms that
of any individual tree [37].
24

5.
RESULTS
This chapter describes the results of our investigation, a quantitative analysis of Borg’s
policy decision, and an examination of imbalanced operational scheduling experience on a dif-
ferent tier. Each method is applied for a different exploratory purpose based on its classiﬁcation:
clustering methods to observe any underlying patterns occurring in the current workload, regres-
sion methods to determine the necessity of isolating workloads for better resource prediction, and
classiﬁcation methods to reverse-engineer the signiﬁcant factors driving the scheduling adjustment
carried out by the Autopilot system.
5.1
Investigation of Underlying Patterns
The K-means clustering can observe the natural aggregation of data points in the Borg
scheduling workload. A controlled experiment is then conducted to delve into the impacts of tiers
on jobs. Since the K-means algorithm is sensitive towards numeric size and each feature follows a
heavy-tailed Pareto distribution [15], the log and square root transformations are applied to adjust
the scaling.
In the ﬁrst set, the scaled priority level is not included. A good model ﬁt is found at 5
clusters. The result has one large group that captures a prevalent number of data points in free,
mid, and production tiers that we call the popular set. One medium-sized group captures the
popular aggregation of latency-sensitive jobs inside the best-effort tier and some extreme jobs in
the production tier. The rest of the small groups capture various outliers or inﬂuencers. As the
number of clusters increases, the medium and large groups remain stable, and small groups are
broken down based on cycles-per-instruction services. The phenomenon describes the natural
tendency of mice and hog problems [15][25].
When considering the priority level in the clustering process, the model has a good ﬁt
at 4 clusters. The support of tier management is signiﬁcant, but it is possible that the unusual
distribution of priority levels may be the deciding factor, as shown in Figure 5.1: a majority of mid-
25

tier jobs is aggregated into the "normal" group, and the free-tier jobs split into the "normal" and
"marginal" groups; both the best-effort tier and production tier jobs are evenly distributed into four
groups, with a large population of high-quality demands jobs clustered into the "high-performance"
group. All jobs in different tiers have a small set of marginal data points aggregated into the
"marginal" and "extreme" group. With the support of the priority level, it is worth mentioning that
each group has approximately the same proportion of jobs from different animal labels, implying
that Borg uniformly manages assignments across quantiles.
Figure 5.1: K-means results by tiers whose jobs are color-coded in different clustered groups. The
red is the "normal" group, the yellow is the "marginal" group, the blue is the
"extreme" group, and the green is the "high-performance" group.
Building upon K-means, the K-prototype model accounts for categorical features as well.
However, the model does not provide any more insights or changes. The underlying pattern de-
picted by the numeric features in K-means occupies the leading aggregation in K-prototype. The
K-prototype result shows that tiers (a categorical form of the priority level), scheduling class, ver-
tical scaling service, and scheduler types (batch or not) do not contribute much to the natural
aggregation in the Borg scheduling workload.
5.2
The Impact of Insulation on Resource Predictability
The high degree of heterogeneity and dynamism in the workloads cause difﬁculty in making
accurate predictions for resource demands. The goal is to verify the statement in the literature[15]
26

positing that the insulation of mice and hog tasks is needed for making better resource usage
predictions for future workloads. The given labels in the model symbolize the segregation of data
points. A set of experiments were conducted, using the basic Lasso, as the main observation
reference towards the impact of those labels. In addition to the mice and hogs labels, additional
animal labels, deﬁned by quantiles and the clustering groups created by the K-means, are added
into the model to observe if different kinds of segregation may be intuitive and critical. The random
forest regression is also applied to understand the main factors correlated with resource usage.
Table 5.1 summarizes the performance of ﬁve cases. The basic Lasso model describes that
the priority level and total lifetime of jobs that exist in workloads are not signiﬁcant predictors.
When considering hogs and mice, there is a constant slight improvement on the Lasso models.
Moreover, the Lasso model with animal labels has better improvement than hogs and mice in
explaining the variation of data sets. However, we believed that the classiﬁcation of animals may
correlate with the impacts of outliers (the group of latency-sensitive and expensive services). The
Lasso result of cluster labels is very similar to Lasso with hogs and mice and implies that the natural
clustering may contain inconspicuous information of that phenomenon. Lastly, the random forest
regression depicts the non-parametric pattern and indicates that animals serve as an important
factor to improve resource usage prediction.
Table 5.1: 10-folds R2 score on ﬁve experiment conditions.
Method
Training Score
Testing Score
Lasso
83.66
85.17
Lasso w. Hog & Mice
84.79
86.12
Lasso w. Animals
88.57
89.57
Lasso w. Clusters
84.75
86.05
Random Forest Regression
94.36
94.36
27

5.3
Reverse Engineering on Autopilot System
Previous research states that conﬁguration tools such as the latest Autopilot, work more efﬁ-
ciently than user manually deﬁned tasks in allocating resources[15]. We apply reverse engineering
techniques to discover possible major contributors to Autopilot’s prediction process success. The
XGBoosting and random forest classiﬁers are ﬁt to predict whether the Autopilot manages a job
completely, with some special constraints or without. Both classiﬁcation methods had great results
in the 10-folds validation. On average, the XGBoosting classiﬁer achieved 94% and 89% training
and testing accuracy, while the random classiﬁer forest had both 84% training and testing accuracy
scores.
Both classiﬁcation methods indicate that scheduling class, the amount of requested re-
sources, and usage information are the deciding factors Autopilot considers in using historical
or similar jobs to make resource predictions. In Figure 5.2, the random forest classiﬁer decision
considers scheduler types, tier types, and scheduling classes more important than those of the XG-
Boost classiﬁer. In reverse thinking, the XGBoosting classiﬁer makes better predictions than the
random forest classiﬁer and deduces that those factors may play more signiﬁcant roles in Autopi-
lot’s decision.
Figure 5.2: Variable importance on the XGBoosting and random forest classiﬁer.
28

6.
CONCLUSION
During the data exploration stage, we found that, even with sampling at a 1% ratio, big
variations in the behaviors across cells are consistent with original data. The disparity between big
jobs ("hogs") and small jobs ("mice") is still extreme.
The investigation using K-means and K-prototype clustering without priority levels under-
scores the ﬁndings from previous studies [15][25], the natural phenomenon of mice and hogs, even
with 1% sample data. In contrast, Kmeans aggregation with priority levels describes a different set
of classiﬁcations on jobs, namely: normal, marginal, high-performance, and extreme. Although
the unusual distribution of priority levels is a concern in biasedly inﬂuencing the clustering re-
sult, those four groups imply correlation to the animal labels deﬁned by jobs’ quantiles and strong
support to insulation.
In regards to the predictability of resource usage, measured by R2, the results suggest a
necessity in the insulation of hogs and mice, or perhaps, more exhaustive segregation such as
animals which is intuitive to capture the stage-wise difference between high demand and regular
jobs. Additional labeling can further improve the pursuit of optimizing resource allocation and
predicting resource usage in dynamic workloads with a high degree of heterogeneity.
Last but not least, observing that current resource prediction algorithms (such as Autopilot)
perform more efﬁciently than users manually deﬁning requirements and procedures, we use re-
verse engineering with classiﬁcation methods to identify the preferences of the Autopilot decision
process. When Autopilot uses historical data as reference, the scheduler weighs and considers a
set of attributes of jobs in rank, such as past resource requests and past actual usage information.
We believe these exploratory experiments on the V3 trace can motivate others to develop
new ideas and methods to optimize the management and scheduling of cloud workloads.
29

REFERENCES
[1] “Borg cluster traces from Google.” https://github.com/google/cluster-data,
2020. Last visited 3/3/2022.
[2] J. C. Mogul, P. Mahadevan, C. Diot, J. Wilkes, P. Gill, and A. Vahdat, “Data-driven network-
ing research: models for academic collaboration with industry (a google point of view),”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 47–49, 2021.
[3] L. A. Barroso, U. Hölzle, P. Ranganathan, and M. Martonosi, The Datacenter as a Computer:
Designing Warehouse-Scale Machines, Third Edition. 2018.
[4] K. Wang, Q. Zhou, S. Guo, and J. Luo, “Cluster frameworks for efﬁcient scheduling and
resource allocation in data center networks: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3560–3580, 2018.
[5] A. Benoit, Ü. V. Çatalyürek, Y. Robert, and E. Saule, “A survey of pipelined workﬂow
scheduling: Models and algorithms,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1–
36, 2013.
[6] S. Sherman, F. Baskett III, and J. C. Browne, “Trace-driven modeling and analysis of cpu
scheduling in a multiprogramming system,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 15, no. 12,
pp. 1063–1069, 1972.
[7] S. R. Goldschmidt and J. L. Hennessy, “The accuracy of trace-driven simulations of multipro-
cessors,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 146–157,
1993.
[8] A. Rico, A. Duran, F. Cabarcas, Y. Etsion, A. Ramirez, and M. Valero, “Trace-driven sim-
ulation of multithreaded applications,” in (IEEE ISPASS) IEEE International Symposium on
Performance Analysis of Systems and Software, pp. 87–96, IEEE, 2011.
[9] S. K. Setia, “Trace-driven analysis of migration-based gang scheduling policies for parallel
computers,” in Proceedings of the 1997 International Conference on Parallel Processing
(Cat. No. 97TB100162), pp. 489–492, IEEE, 1997.
30

[10] R. Grandl, G. Ananthanarayanan, S. Kandula, S. Rao, and A. Akella, “Multi-resource packing
for cluster schedulers,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 44, no. 4,
pp. 455–466, 2014.
[11] O. Hadary, L. Marshall, I. Menache, A. Pan, E. E. Greeff, D. Dion, S. Dorminey, S. Joshi,
Y. Chen, M. Russinovich, et al., “Protean:{VM} allocation service at scale,” in 14th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20), pp. 845–861, 2020.
[12] I. Calciu, M. T. Imran, I. Puddu, S. Kashyap, H. A. Maruf, O. Mutlu, and A. Kolli, “Rethink-
ing software runtimes for disaggregated memory,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, pp. 79–92, 2021.
[13] Y. Feng, Z. Liu, Y. Zhao, T. Jin, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, C. Li, and T. Guan, “Scaling large
production clusters with partitioned synchronization,” in 2021 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC 21), pp. 81–97, 2021.
[14] Y. Chen, A. S. Ganapathi, R. Grifﬁth, and R. H. Katz, “Analysis and lessons from a publicly
available google cluster trace,” EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech.
Rep. UCB/EECS-2010-95, vol. 94, 2010.
[15] M. Tirmazi, A. Barker, N. Deng, M. E. Haque, Z. G. Qin, S. Hand, M. Harchol-Balter, and
J. Wilkes, “Borg: the next generation,” in EuroSys’20, (Heraklion, Crete), 2020.
[16] A. Verma, L. Pedrosa, M. R. Korupolu, D. Oppenheimer, E. Tune, and J. Wilkes, “Large-
scale cluster management at Google with Borg,” in Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Systems (EuroSys), (Bordeaux, France), 2015.
[17] C. Reiss, J. Wilkes, and J. L. Hellerstein, “Google cluster-usage traces:
format +
schema,” tech. rep., Google, Mountain View, CA, November 2011.
Available at
https://github.com/google/clusterdat.
[18] P. B. Menage, “Adding generic process containers to the linux kernel,” in Proceedings of the
Linux symposium, vol. 2, pp. 45–57, Citeseer, 2007.
[19] M. Alam, K. A. Shakil, and S. Sethi, “Analysis and clustering of workload in google cluster
trace based on resource usage,” 2015.
31

[20] M. Baker and J. Ousterhout, “Availability in the sprite distributed ﬁle system,” SIGOPS Oper.
Syst. Rev., vol. 25, p. 95–98, apr 1991.
[21] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “Mapreduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on large clusters,” Com-
mun. ACM, vol. 51, p. 107–113, jan 2008.
[22] C. Chambers, A. Raniwala, F. Perry, S. Adams, R. Henry, R. Bradshaw, and Nathan, “Flume-
java: Easy, efﬁcient data-parallel pipelines,” in ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Program-
ming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), (2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701 New York, NY
10121-0701), pp. 363–375, 2010.
[23] G. Malewicz, M. H. Austern, A. J. Bik, J. C. Dehnert, I. Horn, N. Leiser, and G. Czajkowski,
“Pregel: a system for large-scale graph processing,” in Proceedings of the 2010 international
conference on Management of data, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 135–146, 2010.
[24] L. Lamport, “The part-time parliament,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst., vol. 16, p. 133–169, may
1998.
[25] O. Abdul-Rahman and K. Aida, “Towards understanding the usage behavior of google cloud
users: The mice and elephants phenomenon,” 2014 IEEE 6th International Conference on
Cloud Computing Technology and Science, pp. 272–277, 2014.
[26] S. Di, D. Kondo, and F. Cappello, “Characterizing cloud applications on a google data center,”
2013 42nd International Conference on Parallel Processing, pp. 468–473, 2013.
[27] Google, “Bigquery documentation at google cloud platform.” https://cloud.google.
com/bigquery/docs. Last visited 3/3/22.
[28] O. Hadary, L. Marshall, I. Menache, A. Pan, E. E. Greeff, D. Dion, S. Dorminey, S. Joshi,
Y. Chen, M. Russinovich, and T. Moscibroda, “Protean: VM allocation service at scale,”
in 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20),
pp. 845–861, USENIX Association, Nov. 2020.
[29] W. Chen, K. Ye, Y. Wang, G. Xu, and C.-Z. Xu, “How does the workload look like in pro-
duction cloud? analysis and clustering of workloads on alibaba cluster trace,” in 2018 IEEE
24th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), pp. 102–109,
2018.
32

[30] S. Luo, H. Xu, C. Lu, K. Ye, G. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Ding, J. He, and C. Xu, “Characterizing
microservice dependency and performance: Alibaba trace analysis,” in Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, pp. 412–426, 2021.
[31] K. Rzadca, P. Findeisen, J. Swiderski, P. Zych, P. Broniek, J. Kusmierek, P. Nowak, B. Strack,
P. Witusowski, S. Hand, et al., “Autopilot: workload autoscaling at google,” in Proceedings
of the Fifteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, pp. 1–16, 2020.
[32] A. Likas, N. Vlassis, and J. J. Verbeek, “The global k-means clustering algorithm,” Pattern
Recognition, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 451–461, 2003. Biometrics.
[33] J. Ji, T. Bai, C. Zhou, C. Ma, and Z. Wang, “An improved k-prototypes clustering algorithm
for mixed numeric and categorical data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 120, pp. 590–596, 2013.
[34] J. Ranstam and J. Cook, “Lasso regression,” Journal of British Surgery, vol. 105, no. 10,
pp. 1348–1348, 2018.
[35] M. R. Segal, “Machine learning benchmarks and random forest regression,” 2004.
[36] T. Chen, T. He, M. Benesty, V. Khotilovich, Y. Tang, H. Cho, K. Chen, et al., “Xgboost:
extreme gradient boosting,” R package version 0.4-2, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2015.
[37] M. Pal, “Random forest classiﬁer for remote sensing classiﬁcation,” International journal of
remote sensing, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 217–222, 2005.
33
