1 School of Computing Science 
Simon Fraser University 
Vancouver, BC, Canada 
{firstname_lastname}@sfu.ca 
2 Sustainable Ecosystems Research Group 
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories 
Palo Alto, CA, USA 
{firstname.lastname}@hp.com 
Maximizing Server Utilization while Meeting Critical SLAs  
via Weight-Based Collocation Management 
Sergey Blagodurov1, Daniel Gmach2, Martin Arlitt2, Yuan Chen2, Chris Hyser2, Alexandra Fedorova1 
 
Abstract—Servers in most data centers are often underutilized 
due to concerns about SLA violations that may result from 
resource contention as server utilization increases. This low 
utilization means that neither the capital investment in the 
servers nor the power consumed is being used as effectively as it 
could be. In this paper, we present a novel method for managing 
the collocation of critical (e.g., user interactive) and non-critical 
(e.g., batch) workloads on virtualized multicore servers. Unlike 
previous cap-based solutions, our approach improves server 
utilization while meeting the SLAs of critical workloads by 
prioritizing resource access using Linux cgroups weights. 
Extensive experimental results suggest that the proposed work 
conserving collocation method is able to utilize a server to nearly 
100% while keeping the performance loss of critical workloads 
within the specified limits. 
Keywords: collocation; SLA; virtualization; server efficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rising penetration of digital services leads to a rapidly 
growing demand in data center computing and increases the 
already substantial global power consumption of data centers. 
Despite the significant demand for computational resources, 
servers in data centers tend to be under-utilized. Low 
utilization means that power is not used as effectively as it 
could be, as servers use a disproportionate amount of power 
when idle, relative to when they are busy. For example, energy 
efficiency (work completed per unit of energy) of commodity 
server systems at 30% utilization can be less than half that at 
100% [1][2]. Low utilization also contributes to over-
provisioning 
of 
IT 
equipment 
and 
increased 
capital 
expenditures (CapEx). 
The advent of virtualization enabled consolidation of 
several applications onto a server, increasing its utilization. 
However, even in virtualized resource pools, utilization is 
typically below 40% [17][18] due to: (1) Most virtualized 
resource pools are fairly static and don’t implement live 
migration of virtual machines (VMs). (2) Most data center 
workloads have very bursty demands thus leading to 
conservative consolidation decisions. (3) The performance of 
user-interactive applications drops significantly when they 
must contend for busy resources. The poor performance of 
these ‘critical’ applications at high utilization levels is the main 
challenge in increasing the utilization of servers in data centers. 
In this work, we address the challenge of increasing server 
utilization while maintaining Service Level Agreements 
(SLAs) by pairing critical workloads such as transactional or 
interactive workloads with non-critical workloads such as 
batch processing jobs or High Performance Computing (HPC) 
applications. Typically, a critical workload has strict 
performance requirements specified in an SLA, whereas non-
critical workloads are more delay tolerant. Most workloads can 
be categorized into one of these two groups [1][3]. 
In this work, we assume a virtualized data center that uses a 
work conserving approach (i.e., physical resources are shared 
among hosted VMs). Much previous work in virtualized data 
center management uses a non-work conserving approach 
commonly referred to as resource capping where each 
workload has restricted access to the resources it can use per 
interval. To guarantee workload isolation, the sum of the caps 
per each resource must not exceed the available resource 
capacity. Unfortunately, enforcing caps typically leads to low 
average utilizations. The work conserving approach however, 
typically leads to higher utilization but no resource access 
guarantees can be made. In practice, an expert chooses the 
consolidation factor, i.e., the utilization level up to which 
workloads will be consolidated.  
Our solution is to consolidate both batch and interactive 
workloads onto each server, enabling a very high utilization 
level (80% and above). At higher utilizations, the performance 
of the hosted workloads is likely to degrade due to contention 
for shared server resources. We prevent this by providing 
prioritized access to physical resources using Linux Control 
Groups (cgroups) cpu.shares [38]. Since the term shares is 
often used in cap-based work to denote a portion of CPU 
allocated to a particular job, we refer to Linux CPU shares as 
CPU weights in this paper, to avoid confusion. We ensure that 
critical workloads have preferred access to physical resources 
such that they exhibit similar performance when consolidated 
with non-critical workloads as compared to when they are not. 
We demonstrate that the performance for low priority, non-
critical workloads, which are typically less response-time 
sensitive, remains acceptable as long as server resources are 
not excessively over-provisioned. 
In this work, we focus on increasing the CPU utilization 
while considering other physical resource constraints. We note 
that our approach can also be applied in the presence of 
network and I/O utilization bottlenecks. Our work provides 
several unique contributions:  
1) We demonstrate that static cgroups weights can be used 
to increase overall server utilization while maintaining the 
performance of critical workloads. We quantify the benefits 

 
 
and show the impact to critical and non-critical workloads. 
2) We evaluate the correlation between the CPU access 
weights and the workload CPU consumption. We further 
demonstrate that intelligent assignment of critical workload 
virtual CPUs to physical CPUs can completely mitigate the 
impact of collocation even at very high utilization levels. 
3) We show that dynamic weight management can preserve 
SLAs when multiple bursty critical workloads share resources. 
We present a model that dynamically assigns weights based on 
performance and past resource consumption. We show that this 
approach can be used to provide fairness or performance 
isolation between workloads. 
The remainder of our work is organized as follows. 
Section II presents related work. An overview of the system 
under study is provided in Section III. Section IV describes our 
provisioning method for maximizing server utilization using 
static resource access weights. Section V explores dynamic 
CPU access management of critical workloads, followed by a 
summary of our work in Section VI. 
II. 
 RELATED WORK 
Most prior work in workload management uses some form 
of capping to distribute resources among collocated workloads 
in non-work conserving mode [3–9][11][13–15][31]. Examples 
are limiting CPU resource utilization in Xen with CPU caps or 
limiting network bandwidth through Linux Control Groups. 
With such approaches, non-critical workloads only have access 
to limited amounts of server resources. If the controller does 
not perform runtime adjustments of the caps, the utilization of 
the non-critical workloads will stay low even when resources 
are available, resulting in lower overall server utilization. 
Other work improves server utilization by using weights to 
control resource assignment in work conserving mode. The 
work by Diao et al. prioritizes and dispatches incoming 
requests to service agents based on the SLA attainment target 
in a simulation testbed [39]. Others use existing techniques 
such as CPU shares, Xen CPU weights, or Linux real-time 
priorities to collocate interactive jobs [10][16] and mix them 
with batch jobs [26][36]. By controlling resource access 
priorities of collocated workloads, a controller is able to adjust 
to workload demand changes allowing applications to use 
resources when available. In this work, we introduce a novel 
approach that fully loads the server with critical and non-
critical loads. None of the previous work investigated whether 
a work-conserving approach can be used to significantly 
increase resource utilization up to full server capacity while 
maintaining acceptable performance. We have developed a 
working prototype and we show that it is feasible to achieve 
high server utilization with a detailed experimental study using 
real workloads. We leave the evaluation of financial and power 
saving benefits of full server utilization for future work. 
Our solution works very well with traditional sizing tools, 
e.g., Capacity Manager [33][35], which determine the optimal 
amount of critical workload and ensure that not too many 
critical jobs are placed on a system. Further, sizing tools can 
ensure that batch jobs get enough resources to avoid starvation. 
We then use reactive, weight-based workload management to 
maintain performance of the critical applications. Our weight-
based management solution is complimentary to more 
sophisticated predictive controllers that consolidate workloads 
based on their resource profiles. 
Cap-based techniques that enable existing middleware to 
manage mixed batch and transactional workloads have been 
previously proposed [3]. A workload profiler monitors the 
nodes’ resource utilization and estimates an average CPU 
requirement for each application request. The system then 
predicts the performance of the transactional application for a 
given allocation of CPU resources. The authors use simulation 
to demonstrate the benefits of their approach. 
Bubble-up [4] tries to collocate workloads onto the same 
server that, according to prediction, will not conflict. A 
profiling run for each application is required for making the 
prediction. During the run, the application is collocated with a 
special "bubble" that generates a profiling report. While the 
proposed approach works well for the examined Google 
workload, application profiling may be challenging in general, 
because data center workloads may be unknown in advance. 
In order to address QoS requirements in Q-Clouds [5], 
VMs are first profiled in a solo run to determine the amount of 
resources needed to attain the desired QoS. The Q-Clouds 
scheduler then leaves a prescribed amount of unused resources 
on 
each 
server. 
The 
Q-Clouds 
implementation 
also 
dynamically adjusts VCPU caps of the VMs through the 
Hyper-V hypervisor. 
Several hybrid provisioning approaches [6–8][33] combine 
prediction and reaction while performing cap-based SLA 
management in a data center. They use historical trace analysis 
to predict future workload demands and to determine the 
amount of workload given to any particular server. In addition, 
they implement a reactive controller that handles unforeseen 
events.  
The Active CoordinaTion (ACT) approach described in [9] 
relies on the notion of Class-of-Service, a multi-dimensional 
vector that expresses the resource expectations of Xen VMs. 
Based on these vectors it caps VMs in their resource usage. 
ACT uses historic VM behavior to infer future trends.  
Sandpiper [10] relocates VMs from overloaded to under-
utilized nodes using a black-box approach that is OS and 
application agnostic and a gray-box approach that exploits OS 
and application-level statistics. Explicit SLA violations must be 
detected on a per-virtual server basis in the gray-box 
approach—a hotspot is flagged if the memory utilization, 
response time or request rate exceed an SLA threshold. Before 
resolving the hotspot via migrations, Sandpiper estimates the 
additional resource needs for overloaded VMs using a high 
percentile of the CPU and network bandwidth distribution as a 
proxy for the peak demand. 
The creators of GreenSlot [31] present a parallel batch job 
scheduler for data centers powered by PV energy. They predict 
the amount of available energy in the near future and schedule 
workloads to maximize green energy consumption while 
meeting the jobs’ deadlines. If grid energy must be used, the 
scheduler selects times when it is inexpensive. 

 
 
Table I. Critical and Non-critical Workloads used in this Study. 
Class 
Application 
Description 
Critical 
RUBiS 
RUBiS is modeled after eBay.com and implements the core functionality of an auction site: selling, browsing and bidding. It is 
widely used as a benchmark in research [19][20][21]. We used a 3-tier RUBiS setup in our experiments where client requests are 
first served by an Apache Web server. It answers static HTML pages directly and uses a JBoss application server for dynamic 
requests. The data for the dynamic pages is stored in a MySQL database. The load on the auction Web site is varied by changing 
the number of concurrent clients. 
Wiki 
Wiki is a realistic Web hosting benchmark based on WikiBench [30] and MediaWiki, which is the application used to host 
wikipedia.org. It uses real Wikipedia database dumps and generates traffic using publicly available traces. Our Wiki setup consists 
of a workload generator and three tiers: an Apache Web and application server (PHP-based), a MySQL database server and a 
Memcached server [25].  
Non-critical 
Swaptions 
Swaptions is a financial analysis benchmark suite from Intel that mimics an RMS (recognition, mining and synthesis) workload 
that uses the Heath-Jarrow-Morton (HJM) framework to price a portfolio of Swaptions [23]. Swaptions is a multi-threaded 
application. 
Facesim 
Facesim is animation software that takes a model of a human face and a time sequence of muscle activations and computes a 
visually realistic animation of the modeled face [23]. Facesim is a multi-threaded application. 
Fire Dynamics 
Simulator 
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) is a fire simulator that computes a computational fluid dynamics model of fire-driven fluid flow 
[24]. FDS is a single-threaded application. 
LU, BT, CG 
LU (Lower-Upper Gauss-Seidel solver), BT (Block Tri-diagonal solver) and CG (Conjugate Gradient, irregular memory access 
and communication) are popular scientific programs written in MPI (Message Passing Interface) programming model [27].  
 
Table II. System Parameters  
Parameter 
Range of Values in our Experiments 
Server utilization 
Ranges from 1% in case of the solo RUBiS run with 45 requests per second up to 100% in case of the collocated runs of one or 
two critical applications with three batch jobs. 
Measurement granularity 
We measure performance metrics of critical and non-critical applications every 5 seconds. 
Cgroups cpu.shares 
(CPU weights) 
We vary the weight values from 2 (the minimum possible value) up to 262,144 (the maximum possible value) for each process. 
Linux kernel versions  
3.4, 3.0 
By colocating with other tenants of an Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS) offering, IaaS users could reap significant cost 
savings by judiciously sharing their use of the fixed-size 
instances offered by IaaS providers [11]. Each server instance 
is characterized by a number of resources (CPU, network, 
memory, and disk space) which constitute dimensions of the 
instance capacity vector. Workloads associated with an 
instance are similarly characterized by a multi-dimensional 
utilization vector. User needs are spelled out as SLAs defined 
over the various resources of the instance (e.g., CPU, memory, 
local storage, network bandwidth). Based on this input, a 
desirable VM configuration is calculated, reflecting what the 
service deems best for each customer in the system. The 
framework then carries out the necessary migrations of VMs. 
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
A. Workload Description 
Table I describes the workloads that we use for our 
experiments. We use RUBiS and Wiki as representatives for 
critical workloads and combinations of financial, animation, 
simulation and scientific applications as non-critical workloads 
[22–24][27]. 
Both critical applications are Web applications. Wiki 
represents a fairly large and computational intensive 
application that triggers multiple queries to the database or 
Memcached server to create its dynamic Web pages. Wiki 
response times in our setup are typically on the order of 500 
milliseconds (ms) and above. In contrast, RUBiS is a much 
faster application with response times on the order of tens of 
milliseconds. 
We divide our non-critical workloads into two groups. In 
Group A we use a set of Swaptions, Facesim, and FDS. These 
are popular applications representing three typical types of the 
data center batch loads: finance, animation and simulation. 
Swaptions and Facesim are multi-threaded, mostly CPU 
intensive, with Facesim and FDS being partially I/O bound. 
They have no network communication. Group B is comprised 
of LU, BT and CG, which are CPU bound, network intensive 
MPI jobs. They represent a typical HPC workload. MPI 
applications are becoming increasingly important in the data 
center as more and more HPC workloads are being moved 
“into the cloud” (i.e., hosted in a remote, shared, virtualized 
data center). 
Next, we describe the performance metrics that we use to 
measure the performance level of the workloads. For 
transactional workloads, we measure the average, 95th and 99th 
percentile response time and request rate every 5 seconds. We 
obtain the response times for each request by using information 
from the client (i.e., the workload generator); however, in a real 
environment, response times from the Web server log files can 
be used. We created a monitor that parses the workload genera-
tor log files and calculates the performance metrics at runtime.  
The number of CPU cycles consumed is used to estimate 
the progress of batch workloads. Empirical studies reveal that 
these workloads consume a certain amount of CPU time (with 
small variation) to complete. Hence, we use CPU consumption 
in each measurement interval as a performance metric for the 

 
 
 
a) Wiki Performance 
b) Wiki: Server Utilization 
c) Performance Impact on Batch Workloads 
 
d) RUBiS Performance 
e) RUBiS: Server Utilization 
f) Performance Impact on Batch Workloads 
Figure 1.Workload Collocation using Static Prioritization for Scenario A (Swaptions, Facesim, FDS) and Scenario B (LU, BT,CG)
batch workloads under study. We compare these values with 
the “solo performance” of the batch workload (i.e., 
performance obtained when the batch workload has exclusive 
use of the server) to determine the degree of slowdown 
resulting from collocation. For example, if the CPU utilization 
of a batch workload is decreased to half the utilization of the 
solo run then the slowdown would be 50%.  
B. Experimental Testbed 
Our testbed consists of five HP ProLiant BL465c G7 
servers. Each is equipped with two 12-core AMD Opteron 
6176 (2.3 GHz) CPUs. Each server has 5 MB shared cache and 
64 GB of main memory distributed across 4 NUMA memory 
nodes. All servers are connected via a 10 Gb/s Ethernet 
network and have access to 4 TB of NFS storage. 
We consider an environment where applications are hosted 
within a common pool of virtualized servers. Each application 
or application tier runs in a virtual machine (VM). The 
resources of a physical server, including CPU, memory, disk 
and network I/O bandwidth, are shared by the hosted VMs. In 
our prototype implementation, we use KVM as the 
virtualization platform [28] running on Ubuntu 11.10. We 
further installed the latest stable Linux kernel version 3.4. 
We prioritize the access to CPU cycles for the collocated 
workloads by adjusting the parameter cpu.shares, which is a 
configuration parameter available through Linux Control 
Groups (cgroups). It specifies how VMs are given processor 
time by the scheduler. In our setup, we are able to vary CPU 
shares values from 2 up to 262,144 for each process. These 
values are relative to each other. A value twice as high for a 
process compared to another denotes that it has access to twice 
as many CPU cycles as the other process. In the literature, this 
is often referred to as work conserving mode [32].  
Linux Control Groups also allow prioritizing access to 
resources 
other 
than 
CPU. 
Currently, 
priority-based 
management of I/O and network access is supported via blkio 
and net_prio modules, respectively. Although we did not 
observe significant contention for disk and network in our 
experiments, we note that the method introduced in this paper 
can be directly extended to non-CPU resources by using these 
Control Groups capabilities. 
Table II. System Parameters  summarize the system 
parameters that are considered and the values used in our 
experiments. 
IV. 
DRIVING SERVER UTILIZATION UP  
This section explores how well we can prioritize the access 
to CPU between collocated workloads using static CPU 
weights. We evaluate in detail the performance impact on 
critical and non-critical workloads. 
A. Workload Collocation using Static Weights 
For the experiments shown in Figure 1, we vary the load on 
the server by changing the number and size of batch workloads 
consolidated with the critical workload on the server. To 
change the size of batch workloads, we vary the number of 
virtual CPUs assigned to each batch VM. A consolidation 
factor of one indicates that the sum of the demands of all 
hosted workloads equals the machines capacity, i.e., the 
workloads hosted on the machine are expected to consume all 
available CPU resources. A consolidation factor above one 
indicates that demand for CPU resources is higher than the 
server capacity and thus some workloads will not get their CPU 
demand fully satisfied. As a baseline we run the critical 
workload in isolation. We then evaluate its performance when 
collocating with non-critical workloads. 

 
 
Figure 3. Collocating two Critical WLs with Non-critical WLs. (Scenario B)
Further, we consolidate the critical workload with two 
different sets of non-critical workloads. In Scenario A, we use 
Swaptions, Facesim, and FDS, whereas in Scenario B we use 
LU, BT, and CG as the non-critical workloads. Figure 1 
compares two static weight approaches. The first approach 
Equal Priority follows the default settings in cgroups and 
assigns a CPU weight of 1,024 to each process. The High 
Priority approach provides preferred CPU access to critical 
workloads. Since the critical applications have several tiers, we 
set the CPU weight value for each tier individually. We use a 
CPU weight of 10,000 for critical workloads and a weight of 2 
for non-critical workloads, i.e., a critical workload is allowed to 
use 5,000 times more CPU cycles per interval than a non-
critical workload. This mostly ensures that non-critical VMs 
will only be given access to CPU cycles that are not requested 
by critical VMs. 
Figures 1a)–c) present the results of collocating Wiki with 
non-critical workloads. We performed each experiment 
multiple times and observed little variation in the results. Wiki 
is an open loop benchmark and the Wiki client (WikiBench) is 
configured to submit 40 requests per second. Figure 1a) shows 
the 95th percentile response time of Wiki in seconds with 
respect to the consolidation factor. We use a standard 
MediaWiki setup that has a 95th percentile response time of 
0.5s when running solo on the server, resulting in an overall 
system utilization of about 35% as shown in Figure 1b). In 
accordance with Human Computer Interaction (HCI) research, 
we consider response times below 2s as acceptable application 
responsiveness to humans [34] (lower values are desirable, 
while values over 2s are deemed unacceptable). When 
consolidating Wiki with non-critical workloads, the results 
show that its performance remains acceptable until a 
consolidation factor of 0.8. For example, in Scenario A the 95th 
percentile response time increases to 1.2s when using equal 
weights compared to 0.75s when prioritizing Wiki. However, 
as soon as the server starts getting overloaded, i.e., the server 
utilization gets above 90% in Scenario A or 80% in Scenario B, 
the performance of Wiki suffers greatly with equal weights. 
We note that the response time does not exceed 35s because 
requests time out in the WikiBench client. Giving Wiki 
preferred access to CPU improves its performance vastly. Even 
in the highly overloaded case when consolidating workloads of 
1.3 times the server’s capacity, the 95th percentile response 
time is still below 1.4s in both scenarios. While we do not 
recommend operating servers at this load level, we note that 
unexpected load increases might push a server into such 
overload situations. Providing preferred access to critical 
workloads helps mitigate their performance degradation until 
remedial actions can be taken. Figure 1c) shows the 
performance loss for the non-critical applications. As soon as 
the server utilization approaches 100%, the non-critical 
workloads suffer from access to fewer resources. The figure 
shows that the slowdown of non-critical workloads increases 
by up to 12% when providing preferred CPU access to critical 
workloads. For example, in the High Priority case with a 
consolidation factor of 1.3 in Scenario B the batch workloads 
experience a slowdown of 44% compared to 32% with equal 
weights. We believe that the additional performance 
degradation of the batch jobs through prioritizing critical 
workloads is tolerable as various data suggests that the batch 
deadline estimates are usually padded by 20 to 40% across a 
wide spectrum of systems [29][31]. 
 Figures 1d)–f) shows the corresponding results using 
RUBiS as a critical workload. The RUBiS client is configured 
to trigger an average of 450 requests per second (req/s). RUBiS 
has a much smaller footprint than Wiki, requiring only 6% of 
the server’s CPU resources. In the solo run, RUBiS achieves a 
95th percentile response time of 15 ms. When prioritizing 
RUBiS, its response time at a consolidation factor of 1.1 is still 
below 34 ms for Scenario A and 50 ms for Scenario B. The 
difference in impact between the two scenarios is due to 
workload A being partially I/O bound. As a result, it generates 
less contention than B for computational resources of the 
server. We note that the RUBiS response times are still short 
enough that they fall into the “crisp” response time category 
defined by the HCI community [34]. This means that a human 
user of the RUBiS application would be unlikely to notice any 
difference between the response times in the solo case and the 
prioritized collocation case, even at a collocation factor of 1.1. 
B. Impact of Critical Workload Size on Performance 
The likelihood that workloads with equal CPU demand per 
request get all their demands satisfied depends on their size. 
For example, if Workload 1 services twice as many requests as 
Workload 2 we would need to give Workload 1 twice as large a 
weight as Workload 2, such that both have an equal probability 
to satisfy their demands. Figure 2 shows the impact of the 
critical workload size on its performance. For both Wiki and 
RUBiS we reduce the request rate to 10% of its original rate. 
The figures show that the benefits of prioritization depend on 
the size of the critical workloads. Although both applications 
improve their performance when having preferred access to 
CPU, the differences to the default equal priority settings is 
lower. This indicates that adjusting CPU weights is more 
important for larger critical workloads. 
 
 
 
a) Wiki Performance 
b) RUBiS Performance 
Figure 2. Impact of Critical Workload Size 

 
 
C. Providing Different Weights to Critical Workloads 
This section evaluates the impact of different CPU weights 
for critical workloads. We consolidate two Wiki applications. 
Wiki 1 has a request rate of 4 req/s resulting in 4% server 
utilization, and Wiki 2 has 40 req/s resulting in 35% utilization. 
Further, we consolidate them with non-critical workloads from 
Scenario B and vary the consolidation factor from 0.4 to 1.1 by 
changing the size of the non-critical workloads. Figure 3 
compares four different configurations:  
1) 1k-1k-1k: Each workload has a default weight setting of 
1,024 (1k). This represents the Equal Priority approach from 
the previous sections. 
2) 10k-10k-2: Both critical applications Wiki 1 and Wiki 2 
have a CPU weight of 10k and the non-critical workloads have 
a weight of 2. These are the same weight settings as in the 
High Priority approach. 
3) 10k-256k-2: The smaller Wiki 1 has a CPU weight of 
10k and the larger Wiki 2 has a weight of 256k. Non-critical 
workloads have a CPU weight of 2. 
4) 256k-10k-2: The smaller Wiki 1 has a CPU weight of 
256k and the larger Wiki 2 has a weight of 10k. Non-critical 
workloads have a CPU weight of 2. 
The first Configuration 1k-1k-1k provides the worst 
performance of critical workloads. As indicated in Section 
IV.B, the critical workload size has an effect on its 
performance. Given equal weights of 10k in Configuration 2) 
the smaller Wiki 1 consistently achieves better response times. 
The differences are even larger in Configuration 4) where the 
smaller 
application 
Wiki 1 
has 
the 
highest 
weights. 
Interestingly, its performance improvement is marginal 
whereas the Wiki 2 suffers greatly. Providing preferred access 
to the larger critical application Wiki 2 allows balancing 
performance between the critical workloads. In Configuration 
3) both Wiki applications exhibit comparable performance. 
D. Impact of Kernel Version on Performance 
The feature for fine-grained CPU resource control via 
Linux control groups was added to the kernel in version 2.6.24 
and since then many performance improvements to the kernel 
scheduler have been made. To illustrate the progress we 
compare the results of kernel 3.4 from Figure 1a) and 1d) in 
Scenario B with corresponding results with the default Ubuntu 
11.10 kernel version 3.0. The results are shown in Figure 4. We 
note that the performance of critical workloads improved in all 
scenarios, especially when providing preferred access to CPU. 
For example, in Figure 4a) the response time of Wiki with high 
priority at very high system load is twice as long with the 3.0 
kernel compared to the 3.4 kernel. The performance differences 
for RUBiS between the two kernel versions are smaller than for 
Wiki but still significant, as shown in Figure 4b). While the 
critical application benefitted from a newer kernel version, the 
performance of the batch workloads remained unchanged. This 
indicates that switching costs between Linux processes and the 
allocation of virtual machine CPUs to physical CPU cores has 
improved significantly with newer kernel versions [12][37]. 
Indeed, we have measured a 39% reduction in cross-core 
VCPU migrations in the kernel 3.4 relative to 3.0. The average 
VCPU waiting time in a physical core run queue has also 
decreased by 17%.  
E. Pinning VCPUs of Critical Workloads 
In this section, we investigate the reasons for the 
performance decrease of critical workloads with high weights 
when increasing workload collocation. In particular, we 
noticed that the virtual CPUs (VCPUs) belonging to the VMs 
of critical workloads often were allocated on a subset of the 
available physical cores, which resulted in the critical VCPUs 
competing with each other for CPU cycles. To determine 
whether this affected performance, we pinned each critical 
VCPU to a single physical CPU core. In our setup, the Wiki 
application has fewer VCPUs assigned to it than the number of 
physical CPUs on the server. The VCPUs of non-critical 
workloads remained unbound such that the kernel scheduler is 
able to map them freely. Figure 5a) shows that with preferred 
access to CPU and VCPUs pinned, Wiki’s performance is 
almost independent of the physical server utilization; compared 
to the solo run (0.52 seconds) its 95th percentile response time 
increases to 0.68 seconds at a consolidation factor of 0.7. Even 
at a very high consolidation factor of 1.3 its response time 
remains at 0.68 seconds. 
Figure 5b) indicates that the performance impact on non-
critical workloads is small when pinning critical workload 
VCPUs. While batch workloads are slowed down more at 
consolidation factors below 0.9, they actually improve their 
performance in the High Priority scenario for higher 
consolidation factors when pinning critical VCPUs. 
Figures 5a) and 5b) show that we can make resource 
sharing more efficient by improving the allocation of VCPUs 
to physical CPUs when prioritizing workloads. However, in the 
case where the total number of critical VCPUs exceeds the 
available number of physical CPU cores, the optimal allocation 
of critical VCPUs to physical CPU cores is non-trivial. We 
believe that further performance improvements can be made by 
making the process-to-CPU mapping algorithm of the Linux 
scheduler aware of cgroups CPU access weights. We will 
evaluate this further in our future work. 
 
 
 
a) Wiki Performance 
b) Non-Critical WL Performance 
Figure 5. Pinning VCPUs of Critical Workloads (Scenario B) 
 
 
a) Wiki (Scenario B) 
b) RUBiS (Scenario B) 
Figure 4. Impact of Kernel Version 

 
 
F. Summary of Collocation with Static Weights 
The previous sections showed that collocating critical and 
non-critical workloads achieved server utilizations of 80% and 
above without significant performance decreases for the critical 
workloads. Although the 95th percentile response times of 
critical workloads increased between 41% and 98% when 
comparing a solo run and a collocated run with up to 80% 
server utilization, it is important to note that based on HCI 
research [34] we anticipate minimal consequences for end 
users. In particular, in the solo experiments the physical 
resources are highly over provisioned. This results in much 
lower server utilization. While our approach increases the 
response times to improve server utilization, we maintain the 
response times in similar HCI “categories” [34] (e.g., “crisp” 
for the RUBiS application), such that typical users will not 
notice the difference in performance. 
The experimental results show that when collocating 
workloads, providing critical workloads preferred access to 
physical resources improves their performance significantly, 
while having only a minor effect on non-critical workloads. 
Further, providing prioritized access to resources helps mitigate 
performance losses during sudden overload situations. Finally, 
providing prioritized access to CPU resources using static CPU 
weights in cgroups is available in most Linux distributions and 
does not incur additional overhead.  
V. 
DYNAMIC PRIORITIZATION OF CRITICAL SLAS  
Section IV showed the benefits of providing prioritized 
CPU access to workloads using static CPU weights. In this 
section, we evaluate the impact on performance when weights 
are controlled dynamically. We consider two scenarios: in the 
Fair scenario, we adjust CPU weights based on application 
performance, e.g., the response time. Thus, two applications 
with similar SLAs should have an equal chance to achieve 
their SLA goal. In the Isolation scenario, we consider 
performance SLAs with a specified maximum load for each 
application, e.g., a maximum request rate. We then assign 
CPU weights based on the Fair scenario as long as request 
rates stay below the agreed maximum level. If the request rate 
of an application exceeds the maximum level then this 
application receives lower CPU weights in order to reduce the 
impact on other applications.  
A. Model for Dynamical CPU Weights 
In this section, we assume that each critical workload has 
an SLA assigned that specifies a desired response time RTSLA. 
Our approach first determines how much CPU should be 
allocated to each workload in the next control interval based on 
its current performance and CPU consumption, similar to a 
non-work conserving approach. We then translate these CPU 
allocation values to CPU weights. To demonstrate our 
approach, we use a simple feedback controller. We note that 
more sophisticated feed-back or feed-forward controllers as 
presented in [6–8][33] could be easily integrated. 
First, we determine a performance factor PF for each 
critical application ݅ in Equation (1). ܴܶ௜ሺݐሻ is the 95th 
percentile response time of the application in the current 
interval ݐ and ܴܶ௜
ௌ௅஺ is its response time requirement. ܲܨ௜ሺݐሻ 
ranges from -1 to ൅∞. A value below 0 indicates that the 
application meets its response time requirement, whereas a 
value larger than 0 denotes by how much it misses the 
requirement. 
 
ܲܨ௜ሺݐሻൌ
ோ்೔ሺ௧ሻିோ்೔
ೄಽಲ
ோ்೔
ೄಽಲ
 
(1) 
Next, we determine how much CPU should be allocated to 
the workload in the next interval based on its current 
performance factor and CPU consumption. We note that 
applications are typically comprised of several tiers. For 
instance, the Wiki application contains a Web server, a 
Database and a Memcached tier, each running in its own VM. 
ܥ௜,௝ሺݐሻ is the current CPU consumption of tier ݆ of application ݅ 
as a fraction of the total server CPU capacity and ܥ௜,௝ሺݐ൅1ሻ is 
the desired CPU allocation for the next interval ݐ൅1: 
 
ܥ௜,௝ሺݐ൅1ሻൌ ܥ௜,௝ሺݐሻ· ൫1 ൅ܲܨ௜ሺݐሻ൯ 
(2) 
Finally, we convert the desired CPU allocation values into 
the CPU weights ܹ௜,௝ሺݐ൅1ሻ. In this work, we use a simple 
linear model for the translation. The intuition behind the 
transformation is that in the case when the physical server is 
fully utilized or even overloaded the CPU weights determine 
the amount of CPU each workload tier is able to access. Setting 
CPU weights in relation to the desired CPU allocation values 
gives each workload tier an identical probability to satisfy all 
of its demands. 
For the linear transformation model shown in Equation (3), 
we set ܹ௠௔௫ൌ256k, which is the available maximum CPU 
weight value on our systems. Further, we set ܹ௠௜௡ൌ1݇, 
which is the default CPU weight on our systems. The 
initialization of ܹ௠௔௫ and ܹ௠௜௡ in a different setup must be 
done based on the available control means and datacenter 
requirements. A lesser value of ܹ௠௔௫ would imply less room 
to differentiate between several critical applications, while 
higher value of ܹ௠௜௡would additionally mean more isolation 
for critical jobs from the non-critical influence. ܥ௠௔௫ሺݐ൅1ሻ is 
the maximum desired CPU allocation across all critical 
application tiers. The CPU weight ܹ௜,௝ሺݐ൅1ሻ of application 
tier ݅, ݆ for the next interval is defined as: 
ܹ௜,௝ሺݐ൅1ሻൌሺܹ௠௔௫െܹ௠௜௡ሻ·
஼೔,ೕሺ௧ାଵሻ
஼೘ೌೣሺ௧ାଵሻ൅ܹ௠௜௡ 
(3) 
B. Providing Fairness to Critical Workloads 
This section demonstrates how dynamic CPU weights can 
provide fairness to the critical workloads, i.e., they are able to 
achieve a similar level of performance regardless of their load 
(user requests). For Wiki applications, we specify a 95th 
percentile response time requirement of 2 seconds. We chose 
this SLA, because HCI research suggests that response times 
below 2s are acceptable application responsiveness to humans 
[34]. We note that even in our solo setup Wiki exhibits fairly 
long response times. We believe response times could be 
improved by tweaking the application. 
We then consolidate two Wiki applications, which have a 
default request rate of 20 req/s, together with the batch 
workloads from Scenario B. Each Wiki utilizes about 20% of 
the CPU resources of the physical server. The total server 
utilization is around 80%. After 7 minutes, Wiki 2 experiences 
a 100% increase in its load for 5 minutes. Figure 6(a) shows 
the Wiki performances assigning static CPU weights as in the 

 
 
 
a) Performance with Static Priorities  
b) Performance with Dynamic Priorities (fair) 
c) CPU Weights of DB Tiers (fair) 
Figure 6. Workload Collocation during Spikes Providing Fairness
 
a) CPU Consumption (isolation scenario) 
b) Performance with Dynamic Priorities (isolation) 
c) CPU Weights of DB Tiers (isolation) 
Figure 7. Workload Collocation during Spikes Providing Isolation 
10k-10k-2 Configuration from Section IV.C. During the spike 
the performance impact on Wiki 2 is higher than on Wiki 1 
resulting in a SLA violation for Wiki 2 18% of the time.  
Figure 6(b) shows results for the Fair Scenario where CPU 
weights are assigned dynamically every 5 seconds according 
to the model of Section V.A. The figure shows that in this 
scenario the two critical applications, Wiki 1 and Wiki 2, 
exhibit similar performance over the complete run. During the 
spike, the CPU weights for Wiki 1 decrease such that Wiki 2 
is able to achieve a comparable performance. The CPU 
weights for Wiki 1 and 2 are shown in Figure 6(c). We note 
that both applications perform within their response time 
requirement of 2.0 seconds. 
C. Achieving Workload Isolation with Dynamic Prioritization 
The big drawback of the work conserving mode is the 
reduced degree of isolation. For example, workloads that 
drastically increase their demands can steal CPU resources 
from other workloads with negative impact. In this section, we 
consider an SLA where the performance requirement (e.g., 
response time) is restricted by a certain maximum load (e.g., 
maximum number of req/s). For the experiment, we set the 
maximum allowed load to 30 req/s. If a critical application ݅ 
exceeds the maximum load then we reduce its response time 
requirement ܴܶ௜
ௌ௅஺in Equation (1) to a large value. This 
results in lower CPU weights and mitigates its impact on other 
workloads. We note that a migration controller as presented in 
[6] can be used to migrate off workloads if server load exceeds 
a maximum threshold for too long. As long as load stays 
within the maximum load our approach assigns dynamic CPU 
weights as in Section V.B. 
Figure 7 shows the results of the Isolation Scenario. When 
the load of Wiki 2 exceeds 30 req/s, its response time 
requirement is set to a million seconds, practically infinity. 
The controller then reduces the CPU weights for Wiki 2 as 
shown in Figure 7(c). By adjusting the weights, we are able to 
mitigate the performance impact on Wiki 1 during the spike as 
shown in Figure 7(b). As expected, the performance of Wiki 2 
drops significantly for the time it exceeds the maximum 
allowed load. Figure 7(a) shows the CPU consumption for 
each application during the experiment. Despite the lower 
weights for Wiki 2 during the spike, its CPU consumption 
increases due to the increased demand. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
A long-standing problem associated with data centers is server 
under-utilization, which increases both CapEx and OpEx 
costs. In this paper, we present a novel method for improving 
server CPU utilization through weight-based collocation 
management of critical (e.g., user interactive) and non-critical 
(e.g., batch) workloads on virtualized multi-core servers. Our 
experimental results reveal that the proposed collocation 
method is able to utilize a server to near full capacity with 
small critical workload performance loss. In future work, we 
will consider dynamic pinning of VCPUs to physical CPUs, 
consider hard deadlines for batch jobs, investigate scenarios 
where other resources than CPU are the bottleneck, and 
quantify the energy and cost savings of collocation. 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank Christopher Stewart for valuable comments on 
feedback controllers in the non-work conserving mode. 

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] U. Hoelzle and L. A. Barroso. The Datacenter as a Computer: An 
Introduction to the Design of Warehouse-Scale Machines. 2009. 
[2] http://cdn.globalfoundationservices.com/documents/ 
MSFTTop10BusinessPracticesforESDataCentersAug12.pdf . 
[3] D. Carrera, M. Steinder, I. Whalley, J. Torres, and E. Ayguadé. Enabling 
resource sharing between transactional and batch workloads using 
dynamic application placement. Middleware, pages 203–222, 2008. 
[4] J. Mars, L. Tang, R. Hundt, K. Skadron, and M. L. Soffa. Bubble-up: 
Increasing utilization in modern warehouse scale computers via sensible 
co-locations. In MICRO 2011. 
[5] R. Nathuji, A. Kansal, and A. Ghaffarkhah. Q-clouds: managing 
performance interference effects for qos-aware clouds. In EuroSys 2010. 
[6] X. Zhu, D. Young, B. J. Watson, Z. Wang, J. Rolia, S. Singhal, B. 
McKee, C. Hyser, D. Gmach, R. Gardner, T. Christian, and L. 
Cherkasova. 
1000 
islands: 
Integrated 
capacity 
and 
workload 
management for the next generation data center. ICAC ’08. 
[7] A. Gandhi, Y. Chen, D. Gmach, M. Arlitt, and M. Marwah. Minimizing 
Data Center SLA Violations and Power Consumption via Hybrid 
Resource Provisioning. In IGCC 2011. 
[8] Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Gmach, S. Singhal, B. J. Watson, W. Rivera, X. 
Zhu, and C. D. Hyser. AppRAISE: application-level performance 
management in virtualized server environments. IEEE Transactions on 
Network and Service Management, 6, 2009. 
[9] M. Kesavan, A. Ranadive, A. Gavrilovska, and K. Schwan. Active 
coordination (act) - toward effectively managing virtualized multicore 
clouds. In CLUSTER, pages 23–32, 2008. 
[10] T. Wood, P. Shenoy, and Arun. Black-box and Gray-box Strategies for 
Virtual Machine Migration. pages 229–242. 
[11] V. Ishakian, R. Sweha, J. Londono, and A. Bestavros. Colocation as a 
service: Strategic and operational services for cloud colocation. Network 
Computing and Applications, IEEE Symposium on, pages 76–83, 2010. 
[12] http://www.linux-magazine.com/content/download/ 
65332/508584/file/094-095_kernelnews.pdf  
[13] R. Wang, D. Kusic, and N. Kandasamy. A distributed control framework 
for performance management of virtualized computing environments. In 
ICAC '10. 
[14] D. Minarolli and B. Freisleben, "Utility-based resource allocation for 
virtual machines in Cloud computing". In ISCC 2011. 
[15] E. Loureiro, P. Nixon, and S. Dobson. A Fine-Grained Model for 
Adaptive On-Demand Provisioning of CPU Shares in Data Centers. In 
IWSOS '08. 
[16] A. Sangpetch, A. Turner, and H. Kim. How to tame your VMs: an 
automated control system for virtualized services. In LISA'10, 1-16. 
[17] http://www.dell.com/downloads/global/solutions/public/white_papers/ 
dell_sql_cons_virt_wp1.pdf  
[18] http://www.infoworld.com/print/146901  
[19] B. Urgaonkar, G. Pacifici, P. Shenoy, M. Spreitzer, and A. Tantawi. An 
analytical model for multi-tier internet services and its applications. 
SIGMETRICS 2005. 
[20] T. Wood, L. Cherkasova, K. Ozonat, and P. Shenoy. Profiling and 
modeling resource usage of virtualized applications. Middleware 2008. 
[21] R. Hashemian, D. Krishnamurthy, and M. Arlitt. Web Workload 
Generation Challenges - An Empirical Investigation. Wiley Software 
Practice and Experience, 2011. 
[22] S. Blagodurov and M. Arlitt. Improving the efficiency of information 
collection and analysis in widely-used it applications. ICPE 2011. 
[23] C. Bienia, S. Kumar, J. P. Singh, and K. Li. The parsec benchmark suite: 
Characterization and architectural implications. Technical report, 
Princeton University, 2008. 
[24] R. Curry, C. Kiddle, N. Markatchev, R. Simmonds, T. Tan, M. Arlitt, 
and B. Walker. Facebook meets the virtualized enterprise. In 2008 12th 
International IEEE EDOCC. 
[25] http://www.wikibench.eu/ 
[26] O. Sukwong, A. Sangpetch, H. S. Kim. SageShift: Managing SLAs for 
Highly Consolidated Cloud. In InfoCom 2012. 
[27] http://www.nas.nasa.gov/publications/npb.html  
[28] Kernel based virtual machine. www.linux-kvm.org/page/Main_Page  
[29] http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~chaki/bib/papers/jackson01maui.pdf  
[30] G. Urdaneta, G. Pierre, M. van Steen. Wikipedia Workload Analysis for 
Decentralized Hosting. Elsevier Computer Networks, 2009. 
[31] I. Goiri, R. Beauchea, K. Le, T. Nguyen, M. Haque, J. Guitart, J. Torres, 
R. Bianchini: GreenSlot: scheduling energy consumption in green 
datacenters. In SC 2011. 
[32] K. Funaoka, S. Kato, and N. Yamasaki. 2008. Work-Conserving 
Optimal Real-Time Scheduling on Multiprocessors. In (ECRTS '08). 
[33] M. Arlitt, C. Bash, S. Blagodurov, Y. Chen, T. Christian, D. Gmach, C. 
Hyser, N. Kumari, Z. Liu, M. Marwah, A. McReynolds, C. Patel, A. 
Shah, Z. Wang, and R. Zhou. Towards The Design And Operation Of 
Net-Zero Energy Data Centers. In ITherm 2012. 
[34] N. Tolia, D. G. Andersen, and M. Satyanarayanan. Quantifying 
interactive user experience on thin clients. Computer, 39:46–52, 2006. 
[35] J. Rolia, L. Cherkasova, M. Arlitt, A. Andrzejak, A Capacity 
Management Service for Resource Pools. In WOSP 2005, pp. 229–237. 
[36] B. Lin, P. Dinda. VSched: Mixing Batch And Interactive Virtual 
Machines Using Periodic Real-time Scheduling. In SC 2005.  
[37] https://oss.oracle.com/ol6/docs/RELEASE-NOTES-UEK2-en.html 
[38] http://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/cgroups/ 
[39] Y. Diao and A. Heching. Closed Loop Performance Management for 
Service Delivery Systems. In NOMS 2012. 
