SLA-Based Proﬁt Optimization Resource
Scheduling for Big Data Analytics-as-a-Service
Platforms in Cloud Computing Environments
Yali Zhao
, Rodrigo N. Calheiros
, Graeme Gange, James Bailey
, and Richard O. Sinnott
Abstract—The value that can be extracted from big data greatly motivates users to explore data analytics technologies for better
decision making and problem solving in various application domains. Analytical solutions can be expensive due to the demand for
large-scale and high-performance computing resources. To provision online big data Analytics-as-a-Service (AaaS) to users in various
domains, a general purpose AaaS platform is required to deliver on-demand services at low cost and in an easy to use manner. Our
research focuses on proposing efﬁcient and automatic admission control and resource scheduling algorithms for AaaS platforms in
cloud environments. In this paper, we propose scalable and automatic admission control and proﬁt optimization resource scheduling
algorithms, which effectively admit data analytics requests, dynamically provision resources, and maximize proﬁt for AaaS providers,
while satisfying QoS requirements of queries with Service Level Agreement (SLA) guarantees. Moreover, the proposed algorithms
enable users to trade-off accuracy for faster response times and less resource costs for query processing on large datasets. We
evaluate the algorithm performance by adopting a data splitting method to process smaller data samples as representatives of the
original big datasets. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed admission control and proﬁt optimization scheduling
algorithms. Experimental evaluation shows the algorithms perform signiﬁcantly better compared to the state-of-the-art algorithms in
enhancing proﬁts, reducing resource costs, increasing query admission rates, and decreasing query response times.
Index Terms—Resource scheduling, service aevel agreement, analytics-as-a-service, data splitting, big data, cloud computing
Ç
1
INTRODUCTION
T
HE value that can be extracted from big data greatly
motivates users to explore data analytics techniques
and solutions [1], [2]. Big data analytics is an emerging
trend for decision-making and problem solving in many
application domains, such as healthcare and medication.
Cloud computing [3], [4] greatly eases and beneﬁts big data
analytics by elastically provisioning heterogeneous and on-
demand resources and services at infrastructure, platform,
and application levels, which are provisioned in a pay-per-
use basis with Service Level Agreement (SLA) guarantees.
Big Data Analytics Applications (BDAAs) are usually tar-
geted to speciﬁc domains and typically used by large enter-
prises [5]. BDAAs require large-scale computing, which can
incur signiﬁcant ﬁnancial costs based on the consumed
resources. As such, BDAAs are usually used by large enter-
prises or major research projects and are not suitable for
occasional or individual usage.
To facilitate big data analytics for various domains, a gen-
eral
purpose
Analytics-as-a-Service
(AaaS)
platform
is
required to lead the market and deliver on-demand services
to users at low cost and in an easy to use way [6]. Our pro-
posed AaaS platform brokers BDAAs from third party appli-
cation providers and commodity resources, such as Virtual
Machines (VMs) and storage from cloud resource providers.
The AaaS platform automatically manages cloud resources
for BDAAs based on user demand and provisions AaaS as
consumable services. We focus especially on BDAAs that
typically process read-only queries and leave out data consis-
tency and security issues. The AaaS delivery model greatly
beneﬁts users with limited expertise to set up and manage
large-scale cloud computing environments and enjoy on-
demand AaaS with guaranteed SLAs on a pay per use basis.
Resource scheduling is a core function for AaaS plat-
forms that aim to maximize proﬁts by optimizing resource
and query scheduling, increase market share by admitting
more queries, and improve user satisfaction by delivering
on-demand AaaS with SLA guarantees. AaaS platforms
schedule resources to execute queries with guaranteed
SLAs on QoS requirements of budgets and deadlines, which
allows users to control analytical costs and get timely results
for efﬁcient decision-making. However, resource schedul-
ing for big data analytics on AaaS platforms must tackle
several challenges:

Data analytics for big data with large volumes (i.e.,
terabytes, petabytes) can take considerable time.

Y. Zhao, J. Bailey, R. O. Sinnott are with the University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia. E-mail: yalizhao.alice@gmail.com,
{baileyj, rsinnott}@unimelb.edu.au.

G. Gange is with the Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800,
Australia. E-mail: gkgange@gmail.com.

R. N. Calheiros is with the Western Sydney University, Sydney, NSW,
Australia. E-mail: R.Calheiros@westernsydney.edu.au.
Manuscript received 26 Sept. 2017; revised 17 Aug. 2018; accepted 18 Dec.
2018. Date of publication 27 Dec. 2018; date of current version 3 Sept. 2021.
(Corresponding author: Yali Zhao.)
Recommended for acceptance by K. S. Candan.
Digital Object Identiﬁer no. 10.1109/TCC.2018.2889956
1236
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
2168-7161 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

This requires efﬁcient resource management and
task scheduling techniques that are capable to return
query results before user-speciﬁed deadlines for fast
and efﬁcient decision-making, especially for applica-
tion domains requiring timely decisions.

Big data analytics requires large-scale compute
and storage resources that can incur considerable
resource costs. It is a necessity for users to obtain
query results under controllable costs, especially for
users with limited budgets.

Resource requirements of online analytical requests
ﬂuctuate over time, which raises the requirement for
automatic resource provisioning to react to dynamic
query demands, which can be stochastic.

Guaranteeing SLAs for AaaS is important for user
satisfaction. Violating SLAs not only incurs penalty
costs but also decreases user satisfaction. Effective
and efﬁcient admission control and resource sched-
uling is required to minimize/avoid SLA violations.

Query response time is a major performance indica-
tor of service delivery and should be minimized for
better user experience. Transferring big data for
processing can take considerable time and incur
high resource costs and hence should be minimized.
Data locality-aware scheduling techniques should be
utilized to move the computing resources to the data
by creating cloud resources at datacenters where the
datasets reside.

Maximizing proﬁt and minimizing query response
times while guaranteeing SLAs of service delivery
should be supported. This is a multi-objective opti-
mization problem. The proﬁt optimization problem
requires efﬁcient and effective modeling and formu-
lation for optimal resource scheduling.

Data analytics requests with tight budgets and dead-
lines cannot be admitted if they cause signiﬁcant
reduction of proﬁt, decrease user satisfaction, and
lead to loss of customers. Among existing data ana-
lytics techniques is data splitting that enables users
to trade-off accuracy for faster response times and
less resource cost by processing smaller data samples
as representatives of the original datasets. Efﬁcient
adoption of such data processing techniques in
resource scheduling is required to process big data
with limited budgets and times.
To tackle the above challenges, our research focuses on
proposing efﬁcient and automatic admission control and
resource scheduling solutions to support AaaS platforms, to
not only maximize the proﬁt for AaaS providers, but also to
guarantee SLAs and minimize query time for AaaS users.
The major contributions of our work are:

We model and formulate a multi-objective proﬁt
optimization and query time minimization resource
scheduling problem.

We propose admission control and proﬁt optimiza-
tion scheduling algorithms that are able to admit
queries whose QoS requirements can be satisﬁed to
deliver services with SLAs guarantees; maximize the
proﬁt for AaaS platforms by optimizing resource
utilization; and minimize query response times with
time-efﬁcient query execution solutions.

The optimization algorithms utilize automatic sched-
uling mechanisms that allow the AaaS platform to
provide online data analytical services that react to
dynamic variation of resource requirements based
on realtime queries.

The optimization scheduling algorithms utilize scal-
able scheduling machanisms, which elastically lease
under-provisioned cloud resources while releasing
over-provisioned resources to optimize utilization
and minimize cost.

The scheduling algorithms adopt data-aware sched-
uling to ensure the best data processing locality to
minimize the network transfer times and costs.

The scheduling algorithms enable users to trade-off
accuracy for reduced response times and less cost.
Applying data splitting and sampling techniques
provides signiﬁcant performance improvement for
resource scheduling that enables AaaS platforms to
process data samples compared to processing the
original data.

The scheduling algorithms support ﬂexible query
dependencies. A query can vary from an indepen-
dent task to a complex dataﬂow. Queries that rely on
results of other tasks can only be executed after their
dependent tasks complete. Such ﬂexible support for
task dependencies enables the AaaS platform to han-
dle tasks of different complexities.
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the admis-
sion control and resource scheduling algorithms. The results
show that the optimization scheduling algorithms perform
signiﬁcantly better with regards to saving cost, enhancing
proﬁt, and reducing query processing time in comparison to
related state-of-the-art algorithms. Results also show that after
applying data splitting-based scheduling mechanisms, there
is a signiﬁcant performance improvement including enhanc-
ing proﬁts, reducing resource costs, increasing admission
rates, and reducing query processing times over traditional
resource scheduling mechanisms, i.e., without data splitting.
This paper is a signiﬁcant extension of our previous work
[8]. Compared to our earlier work, we reﬁne and enhance
the modeling and formulation of the multi-objective optimi-
zation problem for resource scheduling to accommodate
new features of task dependency and data splitting based
scheduling. Moreover, we reﬁne the architecture and frame-
work of the AaaS platform by adding data splitter to allow
splitting of large datasets and processing smaller data sam-
ples for quicker response and less cost. We also redesign the
data splitting-based admission control and proﬁt optimiza-
tion algorithms to allow data splitting and task dependency
based resource scheduling. Furthermore, we redesign the
experiments and conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
the performance of the data splitting-based scheduling algo-
rithm and non data splitting methods. We survey the state-
of-the-art research works and compare our work to these
works with regards to various performance parameters. In
summary, this paper makes a signiﬁcant contribution on
the applicability, efﬁciency, and performance improvement
of the data splitting-based admission control and proﬁt
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1237
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

optimization scheduling algorithms for AaaS platforms in
cloud computing environments.
2
PROBLEM STATEMENT
2.1
Overview of the AaaS Environment
An overview description of the AaaS Environment is shown
in Fig. 1.
Users submit queries online to the AaaS platform
requesting particular data analytics services supported by
speciﬁed BDAAs. These queries contain query speciﬁca-
tions including QoS requirements on budgets and deadlines
and data locations where to-be-analyzed datasets reside.
The AaaS platform brokers cloud resources from third party
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) cloud providers while it
also brokers BDAAs from third party application providers
to provide analytical services based on application require-
ments of analysis requests. BDAAs are maintained in a
BDAA registry, which is a catalog for BDAA providers to
register for BDAAs to the AaaS market and also a directory
for AaaS platforms to search for required BDAAs. At any
time, a BDAA can be registered and deregistered from the
BDAA registry. Thus, the AaaS platform needs to search for
availability of the requested BDAAs before admitting
queries. Similarly, cloud resources are registered and main-
tained in an IaaS resource registry. After the AaaS platform
admits queries based on its admission policy, it makes proﬁt
optimization resource and query scheduling decisions to
execute queries. Admitted queries are executed on allocated
cloud resources by adopting query-scheduling solutions.
Finally, the AaaS platform provisions AaaS to users by auto-
matic and dynamic resource provisioning and query sched-
uling and deploys BDAAs on existing cloud resources for
subsequent query processing.
2.2
Architecture of the AaaS Platform
The architecture for the AaaS platform is shown in Fig. 2,
which includes the following components.
User interface serves as a mechanism for users and the
AaaS platform to interact with each other. Users submit
query speciﬁcations and negotiate SLAs with the AaaS plat-
form. Details of the speciﬁcations are introduced in the
modeling section. The AaaS platform outputs admission
decisions and query results via the user interface.
Admission Controller is responsible for query admission.
Queries that can be admitted must satisfy the following con-
ditions: 1) the BDAAs requested by queries are available; 2)
QoS requirements of queries can be satisﬁed based on cur-
rent resource capacity and conﬁguration; 3) to-be-processed
datasets are accessible from data storage.
SLA Manager gets the queries after the admission control
and builds SLAs for the admitted queries to ensure the
AaaS platform can guarantee SLAs during service delivery
to avoid SLA violations that incur additional penalty costs
and cause user dissatisfaction.
Cost Manager manages all the costs in the AaaS platform
including BDAA costs; cloud resource costs, AaaS service
costs, and penalty costs. It provides pricing information to
allow the Admission Controller to make performance esti-
mation for query admission.
Resource Manager brokers IaaS resources from third party
IaaS resource providers and keeps a catalog of all available
resources from the different IaaS providers. The Resource Man-
ager keeps monitoring the status of VMs, which are created, ter-
minated, in-use, and idle. This information allows the Query
Scheduler to take different actions accordingly, e.g., sending
queries to VM instances that are idle for load balancing.
BDAA Manager is responsible for brokering BDAA
resources from third party service providers based on user
requests and maintaining application information. Informa-
tion of BDAAs is maintained and updated in the BDAA
Registry for application searching and selection.
Data Source Manager is responsible for managing to-be-
processed datasets factoring in their size, type and location.
We utilize cloud resources in datacenters where datasets
reside to reduce data transfer times and costs.
Data Splitter is responsible for splitting large datasets to
obtain smaller data samples for data analytics when budg-
ets and deadlines are limiting factors. The data splitting can
be achieved by different approaches such as data splitting
and sampling. For queries that do not require full accuracy
based on processing the entire datasets, the accuracy can be
traded-off for faster response times and less resource costs
by processing a less complete and hence less accurate subset
Fig. 1. Overview of the AaaS environment.
Fig. 2. Architecture of the AaaS platform.
1238
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

of the data. For queries that cannot be admitted due to tight
deadlines or limited budgets, if users allow approximate
query processing, the AaaS platform checks whether the
query can be admitted by estimating the splitting time and
cost together with the data processing time and cost com-
pared to user-speciﬁed query deadlines and budgets. If
applying data splitting techniques can process the data with
SLA guarantees on QoS requirements, such queries can be
admitted for processing.
Query scheduler is the central component of the AaaS plat-
form and coordinates the other components. It makes query
scheduling and resource provisioning decisions based on
realtime resource and BDAA information the AaaS platform.
It aims to make optimization scheduling decisions to maxi-
mize the proﬁt, increase query admission rate, guarantee
SLAs, while reacting to the dynamism of query workload and
resource capacity. The query scheduler enables data locality-
aware and dependency-based scheduling while supporting
data splitting-based scheduling for faster response times and
less resource costs.
2.3
Problem Modeling
The proﬁt optimization resource scheduling problem aims
to ﬁnd the optimal resource scheduling solution to maxi-
mize proﬁt for the AaaS platform and minimize query time,
while delivering satisfactory services to users with SLA
guarantees.
We consider a set of M queries Qs ¼ fQ1; Q2; . . . ; QMg
submitted to the AaaS platform. A query can be a scan
query, i.e., select the average body fat from a patient table,
or a complex query, i.e., a machine learning algorithm to
analyze the factors leading to lung cancer, etc. These queries
request for a set of P Big Data Analytics Applications
BDAAs ¼ fBDAA1; BDAA2; . . . ; BDAAPg that execute
on a set of N resources Rs ¼ fR1; R2; . . . ; RNg. A BDAA
can be a healthcare application running on top of data ana-
lytical framework Spark [9] to analyze patient health data.
A resource can be a VM, storage, or a cluster of VMs, etc.
Different cost policies are applied in the AaaS platform,
such as policies for query costs and penalty costs.
Query Q ¼ fSLA; CR; BDAA; CH; DE; ACg, where SLA
denotes QoS requirements of budget (the maximum cost to
execute a request) and deadline (the latest time to return
the analytical result); CR denotes the requested cloud
resources to execute a query task; BDAA indicates the spe-
ciﬁc data analytics applications that users request to ana-
lyze the data; CH
speciﬁes the characteristics of the
dataset, such as data size, data type, data distribution, and
data locality; DE denotes the dependency requirement;
AC denotes whether the accuracy of the query can be sacri-
ﬁced. If users allow sacriﬁcing accuracy during data ana-
lytics procedures when budget or deadline of a query is a
limiting factor, the AaaS platform may enable processing
representative datasets using data splitting techniques. To
avoid expensive data transfer costs and long data transfer
times, we move the computing resources to the data, hence
we process data by creating VMs in the cloud datacenters
where datasets are stored. We assume the data is pre-
stored in datacenters and that storage and data transfer
costs are paid directly by users.
Big Data Analytics Application BDAA ¼ fAT; Pg, where
AT represents the application type while P represents the
application proﬁle, which contains mappings of the BDAA
cost, required resource time including query time, sampling
time, and splitting time, and resource conﬁgurations for dif-
ferent query requests. Obtaining proﬁles of heterogeneous
BDAA applications requires expert knowledge from vari-
ous application domains. Thus, we assume reliable BDAA
proﬁles are provided by third-party BDAA providers.
BDAAs provisioned by third party application providers
should be accessible through a uniform interface to ease
BDAA brokering and utilization.
Resource R ¼ fRT; REC; NR; CCg, where RT denotes
the resource type (e.g., memory optimized Amazon EC2
VM instances, such as an r3.large instance or a cluster of r3.
large instances), REC represents the resource capacity (e.g.,
CPU, memory, storage, etc.) provided by the resource, NR
represents the number of instances required to execute a
query, while CC is the cost of each resource.
Cost C ¼ fRC; BC; PC; ARC; PROg, where RC denotes
the overall resource cost of the AaaS platform, BC denotes
the cost of BDAA applications that is assumed as a constant
cost charged by BDAA providers, PC represents the penalty
cost if any SLA of a given query is violated, ARC denotes
the overall cost that users pay the AaaS platform for utiliza-
tion of the data analytics services, and PRO denotes the
overall proﬁt made by the AaaS platform. We assume a con-
stant service fee is charged for each query request depend-
ing on speciﬁc requested cloud resources, BDAA, and QoS
requirements. Hence, ARC is a constant value.
2.4
Problem Formulation
The proﬁt optimization scheduling problem is an NP-com-
plete problem that can be polynomially reduced to an Integer
Linear Programming (ILP) problem. We formulate the proﬁt
maximization resource scheduling problem based on the ILP
model [10], [11]. Based on the cost model as introduced in the
previous section, we can know ARC is a constant value. We
aim to provide scheduling solutions with SLA guarantees on
QoS requirements. Thus, PC is zero if SLAs are guaranteed.
The PRO is calculated as PRO ¼ ARC  RC  AC  PC. As
ARC and AC are constant while PC is zero while SLAs are
guaranteed, the objective of maximizing PRO is to minimize
RC while minimizing the query processing time and deliver-
ing AaaS with SLA guarantees.
To achieve the scheduling objective, we have two indi-
vidual objectives to fulﬁll: Objective A and Objective B.
A ¼ minimizeðPn
j¼1 Cj  tjÞ, where j represents a cloud
resource such as a VM or a cluster of VMs; n represents a
set of resources; tj is the number of hours to be used for a
resource j; while Cj is the hourly cost of the resource j.
Objective A aims to minimize the resource cost RC, calcu-
lated as the total costs of different resources, which is the
product of purchased resource time tj and the unit resource
cost Cj. Objective B ¼ minimizeðPm
i¼1 siÞ, where i repre-
sents a query request i; m denotes a set of query requests,
while si is the start time of the query i. Objective B aims to
ﬁnd a query scheduling solution with the cost minimized
resource conﬁguration that can execute queries at the earli-
est time. This enables future queries to start execution at the
earliest time si to reduce tj and hence allows cost saving
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1239
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

and minimizes the query times for quicker responses to
improve the performance of delivered services. The sym-
bols of the formulation are deﬁned in Table 1.
We formulate the multiple Objective Z as a combination
of Objective A and Objective B, which aims at minimizing
resource costs while choosing a scheduling solution that
starts query execution at the earliest time, subject to con-
straints (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12),
(13), (14). The combination leads to a standard lexicographic
optimization problem [12]. The importance of individual
objectives contributing to the proﬁt optimization resource
scheduling problem is A > B. Coefﬁcient F0 is assigned to
Objective A to guarantee the aggregated problem with mini-
mization of all individual objective functions is consistent to
the original proﬁt optimization problem that any change of
A dominate the changes of B [11], [12].
Objective Z:
Z ¼ minimize F0 
X
j2n Cj  tj


þ
X
i2m si


Subject to:
X
i2m; j2n
RRTij  xij


 tj þ Tj
(1)
xij ¼
1;
i scheduled on j
0; otherwise

; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(2)
bik þ bki  1; 8 i; k 2 m
(3)
bik ¼
1;
i executes before k
0; otherwise

; 8 i; k 2 m
(4)
bik þ bki  xij  xkj  1; 8 i; k 2 m; j 2 n
(5)
si  sk þ F1  bik  F1  RRTij; 8 i; k 2 m; j 2 n
(6)
si þ F2  xij  F2 þ Di  RRTij; 8i 2 m; j 2 n
(7)
si  tj þ F3  xij  F3  RRTij þ EPTj; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(8)
si þ xij  F4  F4 þ EATj; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(9)
Cijxij  Bi; 8i 2 m; j 2 n
(10)
X
i2m; j2n
xij ¼ 1
(11)
xij ¼ 0; if j cannot access dataset of i; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(12)
bki ¼ 1; if i needs to process dataset split by k; 8 i; k 2 m
(13)
bki ¼ 1;
if i is a dependent task of k; 8 i; k 2 m
(14)
xij ¼ 1
xkj ¼ 1

¼)
either
bik ¼ 1;
bki ¼ 0
bik ¼ 0; bki ¼ 1

; 8 i; k 2 m; j 2 n
(15)
bik ¼ 1 )
si þRRTij  sk; 8 i; k 2 m; j 2 n
(16)
F1  maxðsi þ RRTij  skÞ þ 1; 8 i; k 2 m; j 2 n
(17)
sixij þ RRTij  Di; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(18)
F2  maxðsi þ RRTij  DiÞ þ 1; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(19)
xij ¼ 1 ) si þ RRTij  tj þ EPTj; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(20)
F3  maxðsi  tj þ RRTij  EPTjÞ þ 1; 8 i 2 m;
j 2 n
(21)
xij ¼ 1 ) si  EATj; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(22)
F4  min si  EATj


 1; 8 i 2 m; j 2 n
(23)
TABLE 1
Deﬁnition of Symbols
Symbol Deﬁnition
i
A speciﬁc query
j
A speciﬁc resource
m
The set of querie
n
The set of resources
tj
The time to be purchased for resource j
Tj
The available resource time of resource j.
LRTj
The remaining time of resource j in previous schedule
RRTij
The required resource time for query i on resource j
xij/xkj
It indicates whether query i / query k is assigned to
resource j
Cj
The unit cost of resource j
si/sk
The start time of query i / query k
bik/bki
It indicates whether query i executes before query k
Di
The deadline of query i
Bi
The budget of query i
Cij
The cost of executing query i on resource j
EATj
The Earliest Available Time that resource j can be
used to execute queries
TFTj
The query ﬁnish time on created resource j
CTj
The clock time of created resource j
RCTj
The creation time of resource j
1240
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Tj ¼
LRTj; j created
RCTj; otherwise

; 8j 2 n
(24)
EATj ¼
TFTj; tasks running on j
CTj; otherwise

; j created
CTj þ RCTj; otherwise
8
>
<
>
:
; 8j 2 n:
(25)
Resource Capacity Constraints. Resource capacity con-
straints are used to ensure that the sum of required resource
times of queries for resource j should be less than or equal
to the available resource time of resource j, as shown in (1),
where xij is a binary variable indicating whether query i is
scheduled to resource j; RRTij is the Required Resource
Time (RRT) to execute query i on resource j; tj is the num-
ber of hours requested to purchase for resource j. When
query i is scheduled to resource j, xij ¼ 1; otherwise,
xij ¼ 0, as shown in (2). For a created resource, Tj is the Left
Resource Time (LRT) before the end of purchased time in
the previous schedule, denoted as LRTj, which can be used
to execute queries in the current schedule; while for newly
created resources, Tj is a negative value that is used to
deduct the Resource Creation Time (RCT) from tj, denoted
as RCTj; as shown in (24).
Query Execution Sequence Constraints. Query execu-
tion sequence constraints deﬁne the execution sequence to
ensure the unique execution sequence of queries for the
optimization solution, as shown in (3), where bik is a binary
variable, which indicates whether query i is scheduled
before query k (if query i is scheduled before query
k,
bik ¼ 1; otherwise, bik ¼ 0).
Query Deadline Constraints. Deadline constraints are
used to ensure analytical solutions are returned before
deadlines, as shown in Constraints (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9),
(10). Constraint (4) is used to ensure the unique execution
order of query i and query k by allowing only one of bik
and bki to be 1. Constraint (5) ensures that query i must be
executed either before query k or after query k when they
are executed on the same resource j, which is derived from
non-linear constraint (15) through linearization. Constraint
(15) ensures that if i and k are scheduled on resource j,
either bik ¼ 1; bki ¼ 0 (i executes before k) or bik ¼ 0; bki ¼ 1
(query i executes after query k). Constraint (6) is derived
from non-linear constraint (16) using Big M method, which
is used to ensure if bik ¼ 1, query i should ﬁnish execution
before k starts execution, where F1 is a sufﬁcient large con-
stant satisfying (17) [6]. Constraint (7) is used to ensure that
if query i starts execution on resource j at si, it should ﬁnish
before its deadline Di, derived from non-linear constraint
(18), where F2 is a sufﬁcient large constant satisfying (19).
Constraint (8) is derived from non-linear relationship (20),
where F3 is a sufﬁcient large constant satisfying (21), which
ensures that if query i is scheduled on resource j, its ﬁnish
time has to be earlier than or equal to the end of the pur-
chased time of resource j, which is the sum of previous pur-
chased end time EPTj of resource j and the new purchased
time tj. Constraint (9) is derived from non-linear relation-
ship (22), where F4 is a sufﬁcient small constant satisfying
(23), which is used to ensure that if i is assigned to resource
j, it should start execution after EATj that is the Earliest
Available Time (EAT) of resource j. If resource j is created
while it has queries running on it, EATj is the Task Finish
Time (TFT) of resource j, denot- ed as TFTj; otherwise,
EATj is the Clock Time (CT) of resource j, denoted as CTj.
If resource j is not created, EATj is the sum of CTj and
RCTj, as shown in (25).
Query Budget Constraints. Budget constraints are used
to ensure that the execution cost of query i on j does not
exceed the budget Bi, as shown in (10), where Cij is the cost
of executing i on j.
Query Scheduling Times Constraints. As shown in (11),
the constraints on query scheduling times ensure that the
sum of xij for a query must be 1 to ensure that the query i is
scheduled to one resource for execution to avoid SLA
violations.
Data Locality Constraints. Data locality constraints, as
shown in (12) are used to ensure that queries can only be
submitted to VMs where to-be-processed datasets are
accessible to avoid expensive data transfer costs and
long data transfer times. If a VM j does not have access
to the dataset of a query i, xij ¼ 0. This indicates that
query i cannot be scheduled to VM j. For VMs that have
access to the dataset of query i, xij will be allowed to be
1 only if such assignment can lead to a proﬁt optimiza-
tion scheduling solution.
Algorithm 1. Admission Control Algorithm
Input: queries submitted by users
Output: admission or rejection decisions of queries
1: for each query 2 submittedQueries
2:
requestedBDAA  search BDAA registry
3:
if requested BDAA is available && dataset is accessible
4:
resConﬁgs  search resource registry
5:
if resConﬁgs > 0
6:
for each conﬁguration 2 resConﬁgs
7:
EET ¼ calculateEET
8:
EC ¼ calculateEC
9:
if EET < deadline && EC < budget
10:
admQueries  admit query
11:
end if
12:
else if query allows sacriﬁce accuracy
13:
apprQueries  get approximate queries
14:
for each query in apprQueries
15:
DSC  estimate resource cost for splitting
16:
DST  estimate time for data splitting
17:
DPC  estimate resource cost for splitting
18:
DPT  estimate the splitting time
19:
if DSCþDPC < budget & DSTþDPT < deadline
20:
admQueries  admit the query
21:
end if
22:
end for
23:
end if
24:
end for
25:
if query is not admitted
26:
reject query with detailed rejection reasons
27:
end if
28:
end if
29: end for
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1241
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Data Splitting Constraints. Data splitting on very large
datasets is required when data analytics tasks are restricted
with tight deadlines or limited budgets. Data splitting and
sampling techniques aim to generate small data representa-
tives of original large sdatasets. Processing smaller data
samples can reduce resource costs while returning analyti-
cal results in a time-efﬁcient manner. If large datasets
are to be processed in such way, bki ¼ 1, as shown in con-
straint (13), which indicates a data processing task i has to
be executed after data splitting task k ﬁnishes the data
splitting job.
Query Dependency Constraints. Query dependency
constraints are used to deﬁne the task dependencies, as
shown in (14), bik ¼ 1 is set when query i depends on the
execution results of query k. This is to ensure a query can
only start execution when its dependent queries ﬁnish exe-
cution. Query dependency constraints allow deﬁning sim-
ple task dependencies, such as bag of tasks, as well as
complex task dependencies, such as dataﬂows.
3
ADMISSION CONTROL AND RESOURCE
SCHEDULING
In this section, we introduce the admission control and
resource scheduling algorithms, which admit queries and
make resource scheduling decisions to allow the AaaS plat-
form to achieve proﬁt optimization objectives with mini-
mized query processing times and SLA guarantees.
3.1
Admission Control
Admission control is the prerequisite for the AaaS platform
to make effective and efﬁcient query and resource schedul-
ing decisions. The admission controller aims to maximize
the query admission rate for higher market share while
ensuring all the admitted queries can be successfully exe-
cuted with SLA guarantees. It only admits queries whose
QoS requirements can be satisﬁed with provisioned BDAAs
and resources.
There are two possible scenarios where queries can be
admitted. Scheduling Scenario 1: as we have considered in
previous work [8], queries have sufﬁcient budgets and
deadlines, which allows queries to be executed by proc-
essing the entire datasets. Scheduling Scenario 2: users
have limited budgets to spend and tight deadlines to
obtain results. In this way, traditional data processing on
the original datasets cannot fulﬁll QoS requirements for
user queries. To face the challenge, data splitting techni-
ques are utilized to obtain samples of the original data-
sets
that
enables
quicker
processing
of
queries
on
smaller datasets with reduced costs. After admission
control, if queries cannot be admitted by the AaaS plat-
form, the reasons for rejection are presented to users to
give them the chance to modify their query speciﬁcations
for resubmission.
The admission control algorithm works in the follow-
ing way, as shown in Algorithm 1. It gets online queries
submitted by users. Then, it iteratively makes admission
decisions for each query. The admission control algo-
rithm ﬁrst checks whether the BDAA requested by the
query is available and the dataset is accessible. If the
conditions are satisﬁed, the admission controller further
checks whether the QoS requirements of a query can be
satisﬁed by any resource conﬁguration by searching all
possible Resource Conﬁgurations (resConﬁgs) in the
resource registry. The Scenario 1 of the admission control
is shown in Lines 3-11. For each resource conﬁguration,
it calculates the Estimated Execution Time (EET) and
Estimated Cost (EC) to execute the query on such conﬁg-
uration at the earliest time without queuing the query. If
such a conﬁguration exists, the query is admitted.
If a query cannot be admitted due to limitations of
budgets and/or deadlines, it is then further considered
for approximate processing under the condition that the
accuracy of the queries can be traded-off for quicker
times and less costs, as shown in Lines 12-24. For each
approximate query, admission control is conducted to
estimate whether applying a data splitting method can
satisfy its QoS requirements. The admission controller
re-estimates the overall data processing cost as a result
of the Data Splitting Cost (DSC) and the Data Processing
Cost (DPC) while the overall data processing time as a
result of the Data Splitting Time (DST) and the Data
Processing Time (DPT). If a query can be executed by
approximately processing split smaller datasets, it is
admitted to the AaaS platform as shown in Scenario 2.
After
the
splitting-based
admission
control,
all
the
queries that cannot be admitted are given rejection rea-
sons, as shown in Lines 25-27.
3.2
Resource Scheduling
In this section, we propose the proﬁt optimization algorithm
based on the ILP formulation of the resource scheduling
problem. We compare the performance of the optimization
algorithm against several heuristic algorithms. We also pro-
pose the data splitting-based proﬁt optimization algorithm
to enable big data processing under limited budgets and
tight deadlines.
3.2.1
Proﬁt Optimization (PO) Scheduling Algorithm
We build the PO resource scheduling algorithm, as
shown in Algorithm 2, to maximize proﬁt for the AaaS
platform while processing queries with SLA guarantees
and minimized processing times. PO ﬁrst gets all submit-
ted queries for each BDAA and makes query admission
control decisions, as shown in Lines 1-3. Afterwards, it
checks whether any resource conﬁguration can process
the admitted queries, admQueries, while satisfying QoS
requirements. If such conﬁgurations are available, PO
then selects the cost minimized conﬁgurations as the
resources to execute queries. For admQueries, PO uses a
heuristic method selectResourceHeuristic to decide the
resource inputs, heuResources, for the POScheduling
method (Lines 4-6). The POScheduling method adopts the
ILP formulation of the resource scheduling problem with
Objective Z subject to Constraints (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6),
(7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12). For extremely large query
arrival rates, if no feasible solution is returned by POS-
cheduling within a scheduling timeout, the heuristic algo-
rithm is utilized to avoid deadline violations (Lines 8-
14). After adopting the scheduling solution, PO scales
resources down by periodic checks. During a check, if
1242
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

there is any resource that is idle and reaching the end of
its billing period, the PO scheduling algorithm termi-
nates such VMs to reduce resource costs (Lines 15-18).
The selectResourceHeuristic method (Lines 19-26) signiﬁ-
cantly reduces Algorithm Running Time (ART) of POSchedul-
ing by reducing the search space to allow it to efﬁciently
generate scheduling solutions. It ﬁrst selects the available
resources, avaResources, from existing resources; then, it selects
resources that can execute at least one query satisfying its QoS
requirements from avaResources, as exeResources; afterwards,
it utilizes maximumDelayTime-based scheduling method to
maps adQueries to exeResource. The selectResourceHeuristic
method combines exeResources and newResources as the heuRe-
sources to input to the POScheduling method. The heuResources
provisions sufﬁcient resource capacity to allow POScheduling
to schedule queries with SLA guarantees. The capacity pro-
vided by heuResources is close to the optimal resource conﬁgu-
ration that can be found by POScheduling, which greatly
reduces the search space to ﬁnd the optimal resource conﬁgu-
ration and allows POScheduling to return timely proﬁt optimi-
zation resource scheduling solutions.
The maximumDelayTime method (Lines 27-29) adopts a
Maximum Delay Time (MDT) based scheduling method.
MDT is the maximum time a query can be delayed for exe-
cution, which is the difference between query deadline and
its execution time. The maximumDelayTime method ﬁrst
sorts queries in the MDT ascending order. Then, it keeps
Algorithm 2. PO Resource Scheduling Algorithm
Input: submitted queries, resource conﬁgurations, existing
resources, and BDAAs
Output: scheduling solution
1: for each BDAA 2 requested BDAAs
2:
queries  get all submitted queries of BDAA
3:
admQueries  admissionControl (queries, resConﬁgs,
BDAA)
4:
if (admQueries >0)
5:
resources  get existing resources of BDAA
6:
heuResources  selectResourceHeuristic (resources,
resConﬁgs, admQueries, BDAA)
7:
solution  POScheduling (admQueries, heuResour-
ces, BDAA)
8:
if feasible solution is returned within scheduling timeout
9:
adopt scheduling solution to execute queries
10:
end if
11:
else
12:
solution  maximumDelayTime (heuResources,
admQueries, BDAA)
13:
adopt scheduling solution to execute queries
14:
end else
15:
resources  get existing resources of BDAA
16:
scaleDown(resources)
17:
end if
18: end for
19: Procedure: selectResourceHeuristic (resources, resConﬁgs,
admQueries, BDAA)
20:
avaResources  get available resources
21:
exeResources  select resources from avaResources
22:
maximumDelayTime (admQueries, exeResources, BDAA)
23:
if any query not scheduled in admQueries
24:
newResources  newResourceHeuristic (resConﬁgs,
admQueries, BDAA)
25:
heuResources  exeResources þ newResources
26:
end if
27:
Procedure: maximumDelayTime (admQueries, heuRe-
sources, BDAA)
28:
sort admQueries based on MDT
29:
schedule admQueries to resources with minimal EST
30: Procedure: newResourceHeuristic (resConﬁgs, admQu-
eries, BDAA)
31: modiﬁcations  get all possible modiﬁcations
32:
newResources  searchHeuristic (resConﬁgs, modiﬁca-
tions, admQueries, BDAA)
33: Procedure: POScheduling (admQueries, heuResources,
BDAA)
34:
getUpdatedInfo(admQueries, heuResources, BDAA)
35:
deﬁneScheduleObj(Objective Z)
36:
deﬁneScheduleConstraints (Constraints 1-12)
37:
deﬁneTimeOut(timeout)
38:
solveScheduleProblem()
39:
solution  getScheduleSolution()
Algorithm 3. SPO Resource Scheduling Algorithm
Input: submitted queries, resource conﬁgurations, existing
resources, and BDAAs
Output: scheduling solution
1: for each BDAA 2 requested BDAAs
2:
queries  get all submitted queries of BDAA
3:
admQueries  admissionControl (queries, resourceCon-
ﬁgurations, BDAA)
4:
apprQueries  get approximate queries
5:
for each query in approximateQueries
6:
dataSplittingTasks  generate data splitting tasks
7:
end for
8:
anaTasks  admQueries þ dataSplittingTasks
9:
if (anaTasks > 0)
10:
resources  get existing resources of BDAA
11:
heuResources  selectResourceHeuristic (resour-
ces, resConﬁgs, anaTasks, BDAA)
12:
solution  SPOScheduling (anaTasks, heuResources,
BDAA)
13:
if feasible solution is returned within scheduling
timeout
14:
adopt scheduling solution to execute queries
15:
end if
16:
else
17:
solution  maximumDelayTime (heuResources,
anaTasks, BDAA)
18:
adopt scheduling solution to execute queries
19:
end else
20:
resources  get existing resources of BDAA
21:
scaleDown(resources)
22:
end if
23: end for
24: Procedure: SPOScheduling (anaTasks, heuResources, BDAA)
25:
getUpdatedInfo(anaTasks, heuResources, BDAA)
26:
deﬁneScheduleObj(Objective Z)
27:
deﬁneScheduleConstraints(Constraints 1-14)
28:
deﬁneTimeOut(timeout)
29:
solveScheduleProblem()
30:
solution  getScheduleSolution()
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1243
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

mapping queries with minimal MDT ﬁrst to resources that
can satisfy their SLAs and give them the Earliest Starting
Time (EST). After the MDT-based scheduling, if there is any
query not scheduled due to limited resource capacity, the
newResourceHeuristic method is utilized to create newResour-
ces to execute queries.
The newResourceHeuristic method (Lines 30-32) applies a
search heuristic, searchHeuristic, to ﬁnd the local cost-mini-
mal resource conﬁguration to create new resources for
queries. The set of all possible resource conﬁgurations for
a requested BDAA is represented by a directed acyclic
graph, Configuration ¼ ðNode; EdgeÞ, where Node is a
set of nodes while Edge is a set of edges. A node is a pos-
sible resource configurationi. An edge ðconfigurationi;
configurationiþ1Þ
indicates
by
applying
a
modiﬁcation,
configurationiþ1 can be obtained from configurationi. The
number of resource types available in the AaaS platform
determines the number of possible modification s, which
include: adding the cheapest resource, adding more expen-
sive resource, utill adding the most expensive resource. The
newResourceHeuristic method gets all possible modifications
and iteratively applies each modification on current
resource conﬁguration to generate a new conﬁguration to
execute queries. It continues these steps until it ﬁnds the
cost-minimal local-optimal resource conﬁguration, newRe-
sources, to execute queries with guaranteed SLAs.
The ProﬁtOptimizationScheduling method (Lines 33-39)
ﬁrst gets updated information of heuResources, admQueries,
and BDAA. Afterwards, it creates the ILP solver with
deﬁned Objective Z and deﬁned Constraints (1), (2), (3), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12). Afterwards, it speciﬁes a
timeout as the maximum time that the ILP solver can run.
Then POScheduling utilizes the ILP solver to ﬁnd the optimal
solution for the scheduling problem. If a feasible solution is
found, it is then applied in the AaaS platform to provision
resources and schedule queries. Otherwise, the MDT-based
scheduling method is utilized to schedule admQueries to
heuResources.
3.2.2
Heuristic Greedy Search (HGS) Algorithm
The HGS scheduling algorithm is a combination of the
selectResourceHeuristic method and the maximumDelayTime
method. After admitting queries, the HGS scheduling algo-
rithm ﬁrst ﬁnds heuResources by applying the selectResource-
Heuristic method and heuristically schedules queries to
heuResources by applying the maximumDelayTime schedul-
ing method. If the POScheduling method of the PO schedul-
ing
algorithm
cannot
return
any
feasible
scheduling
solution with deﬁned timeout, the maximumDelayTime
method is utilized as the scheduling method for PO to
schedule queries in a heuristic way to avoid deadline viola-
tions. In this particular scenario, the scheduling solution
generated by the PO scheduling algorithm is the same as
the HGS scheduling algorithm.
3.2.3
Adaptive ILP (AILP) Algorithm
The AILP scheduling algorithm [6] is a two-phase resource
scheduling algorithm, which aims to provide cost-effective
resource scheduling solution to execute queries with SLA
guarantees on budgets and deadlines. AILP provisions a
scalable resource scheduling solution by applying a sched-
uling method based on its ILP modeling for two scheduling
phases. In Phase 1, AILP aims to maximize resource utiliza-
tion of existing resources and scale resources down by ter-
minating existing resources when resources are over-
provisioned to minimize resource cost with SLA guarantees.
In Phase 2, if there is any query not successfully scheduled
due to the under-provision of resources, AILP scales
resources up to execute queries by creating resources with
minimal resource cost while satisfying SLAs. To avoid
unpredicted arrival of large number of queries, AILP speci-
ﬁes timeout to limit algorithm running time as latest time
ILP-based scheduling method can run. If the timeout is
exceeded when no feasible solution is returned, AILP
utilizes maximumDelayTime scheduling method to make
scheduling decision to avoid deadline violations. If the
ILP-based scheduling method of AILP cannot return feasi-
ble solution, AILP generates the same solution as the
solution generated by running AGS scheduling algorithm
directly in this particular scenario.
3.2.4
Adaptive Greedy Search (AGS) Algorithm
The AGS scheduling algorithm [6] is a two-phase schedul-
ing heuristic, which applies maximumDelayTime and search-
Heuristic methods. After admission control, AGS schedules
admQueries to existing resources by applying maximum
DelayTime scheduling method in Phase 1. If created resour-
ces have limited capacity to execute queries satisfying QoS
requirements, AGS then creates new VMs to process queries
in Phase 2 by applying the searchHeuristic method to ﬁnd
local cost-minimal conﬁguration of resources, newResource,
and schedules queries to newResource based on the new
ResourceHeuristic method by applying a local cost-minimal
resource conﬁguration.
3.2.5
Data Splitting-Based Proﬁt Optimization (SPO)
Scheduling Algorithm
For big data analytics with limited budgets or tight deadlines,
such analytical requests cannot always be admitted due to
QoS constraints. To tackle this challenge, data splitting-based
scheduling algorithms can be applied to process a subset of
the data and return analytical solutions with less costs and
faster responses.
SPO applies SLA and data splitting based scheduling
that allocate resources to execute queries on smaller split
data samples with SLA guarantees. SPO enables processing
queries with tight deadlines and limited budgets and allows
the analytical results to be returned in a timely manner
with controllable costs. It also beneﬁts users who have cost-
saving purposes and want timely results where accuracy is
not a limited factor for the tasks. The presudo code of the
SPO algorithm is shown in Algorithm 3.
The scheduling scenario for SPO works as follows: users
submit data analytics requests to the AaaS platform request-
ing BDAAs to process their datasets. For each BDAA, the
SPO scheduler ﬁrstly gets all the queries, resources running
the BDAA, and the current resource conﬁguration of the
AaaS platform as input data. The resource scheduler then
calls the admission controller to admit queries. After admis-
sion control, SPO schedule queries based on the SPO
1244
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Scheduling method, which adopts the ILP formulation of
the resource scheduling problem with Objective Z subject to
Constraints (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12),
(13), (14).
If there are queries that cannot be admitted due to con-
straints of budgets and deadlines to process the large data-
sets, the Admission Controller checks among these queries
and tries to re-admit the approximate queries, apprQueries,
which allow approximate processing. If applying the split-
ting technique leads to satisfactory service delivery with
respect to QoS requirements of queries, such queries are
admitted. Afterwards, SPO scheduler generates the data
analytics tasks, anaTasks, including data splitting tasks and
data processing tasks, as shown in Lines 1-8. SPO then
selects
heuResources
by
applying
selectResourceHeuristic
method. Afterwards, the SPO scheduler applies SPOSched-
uling to generate proﬁt-optimal scheduling solution, as
shown in Lines 9-12.
The SPOScheduling method (Lines 24-30) ﬁrst gets the up-
to-date information regarding the BDAA, queries, and
resources as input to the optimization solver. Then, SPO
speciﬁes the objective and constraints of the scheduling prob-
lem. SPO shares the same objective function as PO while
accommodating additional constraints for data splitting and
data dependencies. Finally, SPO utilizes the solver to gener-
ate the optimized scheduling solution. If feasible solutions
are genereated within scheduling timeout, the solution is
applied to execute queries. Otherwise, the heuristic schedul-
ing approach maximumDelayTime is utilized to generate alter-
native solution to schedule resources (Lines 13-19). After
applying the scheduling solution to execute queries, the SPO
scheduler further conducts periodic check to scale resources
down (Lines 20-21). After the current schedule, new periodic
schedules are triggered as more online queries submitted by
users arrive at the AaaS platform and need to be scheduled
and processed with SLA guarantees.
4
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The admission control and proﬁt optimization scheduling
algorithms aim to maximize the proﬁt for AaaS platforms
and deliver AaaS services with SLA guarantees. In this sec-
tion, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed algorithms in
admission control, SLA guarantee, proﬁt enhancement, cost
saving, resource conﬁguration, algorithm running time, and
query admission.
4.1
Experiment Setup
4.1.1
Experiment Environment
To evaluate the proposed admission control and resource
scheduling algorithms, we build the AaaS framework in
CloudSim [22], which is a discrete event simulation platform
that enables modeling and simulation of cloud environments
with on-demand resource provisions and conﬁgurations. It
allows us to conduct repeatable and controllable evaluations
of our proposed resource scheduling solutions without incur-
ring expensive IaaS resource and BDAA costs. We utilize
IBM ILOG CPlex 5.5 as the integer linear programming
solver. CPlex is an optimization software package, which is
an analytical decision support toolkit for rapid development
and deployment of optimization models using mathematical
and constraint programming [21]. We study algorithm perfor-
mance for different scheduling scenarios including periodic
scheduling that schedules queries for each Scheduling Inter-
val (SI) and non-periodic (realtime) scheduling that schedules
queries based on arrival times.
4.1.2
Resource Conﬁguration
We simulate a datacenter that consists of 500 physical nodes.
Each node has 50 CPU cores, 100 GB memory, 10 TB storage,
and 10 GB/s bandwidth. We simulate ﬁve types of memory
optimized VMs based on the Amazon EC2 VM model.
The VMs are r3.large, r3.xlarge, r3.2xlarge, r3.4xlarge, and
r3.8xlarge [13]. The resource conﬁguration to execute queries
can be a single VM or a cluster of VMs. A resource is charged
based on the hourly utilization. The unit for memory is GiB,
for storage is GB, and for the resource cost is dollar/hour.
4.1.3
Data Analytics Workload
The data analytics workload generated in this study is
based on Big Data Benchmark [14] and a Normal Distri-
bution (ND) based data splitting work [7]. The ND based
data splitting technique [7] is utilized to split the original
large datasets to obtain smaller split datasets to process.
It provides signiﬁcant performance improvement com-
pared to process the original datasets. The ND-splitting
work details the resource conﬁgurations and times to
split large datasets using ND based data splitting appli-
cations while, the Big Data Benchmark details query
processing times and the resource conﬁgurations using
the Amazon EC2 Cloud to run queries on large datasets
using different data analytic frameworks with given data
size, data type, and data location. Based on the data
splitting and processing information, we model the time
for data processing and splitting on BDAAs under differ-
ent resource conﬁgurations.
Each query request contains the following information:
Submission time which is generated using a Poisson process
with 1 minute mean Poisson arrival interval. Query type
includes scan query, aggregation query, join query, and
User Deﬁned Function (UDF) query. BDAAs: 4 types of
BDAAs are considered in our experiment that are built on
Impala (disk) (BDAA1) [15], Shark (disk) (BDAA2) [16],
Hive (BDAA3) [17], and Tez (BDAA4) [18]. Resource time is
modeled based on the resource requirements of queries.
As the performance of queries can vary, we model
10 percent performance variation by introducing a variation
coefﬁcient [19], which is generated from a Uniform Distri-
bution with upper bound 1.1 and lower bound 0.9. User: we
simulate 50 users who submit queries and request for
BDAAs. Deadline is generated as the benchmark does not
contain QoS requirements on deadline, so is budget. Two
types of deadline are considered, tight deadline and loose
deadline. Tight deadline is generated using a Normal Distri-
bution (3, 1.4). Loose deadline is generated similarly using a
Normal Distribution (8, 3) [20]. Similarly, Budget contains
tight budget and loose budget. Tight budget is generated
using a Normal Distribution (3, 1.4) while loose budget is
generated using a Normal Distribution (8, 3).
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1245
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4.2
SLA Based Resource Scheduling
We generate an approximate 7 hours query workload on
30 GB data that contains 400 queries. We conduct the real-
time scheduling and periodic scheduling by varying the SI
from 10 to 60 (unit: minute) to evaluate the algorithm
performance regarding admission control, SLA guarantee,
proﬁt enhancement, resource cost, resource conﬁguration
and algorithm runtime.
4.2.1
Admission Control and SLA Guarantees
We conduct the realtime scheduling and periodic schedul-
ing by varying the SI from 10 to 60 (unit: minute) to evaluate
the algorithm performance regarding admission control and
SLA guarantee. We calculate the query admission rate and
SLA guarantee rate based on the obtained results, as shown
in Table 2. For realtime scheduling, the admission rate is
84.0 percent. For periodic scheduling with SI varied from 10
to 60, the admission rate decreases from 79.3 to 63.0 percent
since the longer SI is the more queries are rejected due to
deadline constraints. Thus, shorter SIs are recommended as
more queries can be admitted to increase user satisfaction
and enlarge market share. All admitted queries are success-
fully executed with 100 percent SLA guarantees, which is
the result of effective and efﬁcient admission control and
resource scheduling. Service delivery with SLA guarantees
helps to increase user satisfaction and reputation of AaaS
providers.
4.2.2
Proﬁt Enhancement and Cost Saving
We evaluate the mean and median resource costs and prof-
its of PO compared to HGS, AILP, and AGS for all schedul-
ing scenarios, as shown in Figure 3. Compared to HGS,
AILP and AGS, PO saves 7 to 15 percent more resource
costs respectively while creating 9 to 19 percent higher
proﬁt. Moreover, the mean proﬁt created by PO is $104
and the resource cost is $126. Compared to HGS, AILP,
and AGS, the proﬁt of PO is [9, 10, 21 percent] higher while
the resource cost is [7, 7, 15 percent] less. The above results
indicate the overall performance advantages of PO in
achieving higher cost saving and proﬁt enhancement
objectives.
1) Proﬁts and Resource Costs for Different Scenarios.
We detail the performance evaluation of PO in different
scheduling scenarios, as shown in Fig. 4. For realtime and
periodic scheduling, results indicate that PO creates the
highest proﬁt and generates the least cost while AGS per-
forms the opposite. As an optimization algorithm, PO per-
forms signiﬁcantly better than AILP to generate proﬁt
optimization solutions. As a heuristic algorithm, HGS per-
forms signiﬁcantly better than AGS that serves as a suitable
alternative algorithm to deliver cost-effective scheduling
solutions for extreme large-scale arrivals of queries. From
this section on, we do not include AGS and AILP in the
evaluation for simplicity purposes.
The obtained results also show that PO creates higher
proﬁt and generates less resource cost compared to HGS for
both realtime and periodic scheduling. As SI increases, due
to high query arrival rates, the scheduling decisions gener-
ated by PO for some schedules may not be the optimal ones,
which weaken the advantages of PO.
SI can be adjusted to a suitable scale based on the arrival
rate of queries for different workloads to enable PO to gen-
erate timely proﬁt optimization solutions. To achieve higher
cost saving and proﬁt enhancement, while admitting more
queries, periodic scheduling with SI ¼ 40 is the best solu-
tion to execute the query workload.
2) Performance Evaluation for Different BDAAs. We
also evaluate the efﬁciency of PO for each BDAA with
SI ¼ 40. As shown in Fig. 5, for different BDAAs, the
resource cost and proﬁt vary signiﬁcantly. This is caused by
variations in the number of admitted queries and their
dynamic needs for resources. The results show that PO cre-
ates higher proﬁts and generates less resource costs for
BDAA1, BDAA3, and BDAA4 compared to HGS. For
BDAA2, the proﬁt and resource cost of PO and HGS are the
same. We further analyze the results, which show it takes
15.8 hours for PO to execute queries on 7r3.large VMs
while it takes 12.4 hours for HGS to execute queries on 7r3.
large and 1r3.xlarge VMs. If PO and HGS are used to run a
TABLE 2
Query Admission and SLA Guarantees
Rate
Real Time
Periodic
10
20
30
40
50
60
Admission
84.0
79.3
74.8
71.8
68.5
65.3
63. 0
SLA Guarantee
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Fig. 3. Median proﬁts and resource costs of PO, HGS, AILP, and AGS
algorithms.
Fig. 4. Proﬁts and resource costs of PO, HGS, AGS, and AILP
algorithms.
1246
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

different workload, the performance ad vantages of PO for
BDAA2 can be shown.
3) Performance Evaluation for Single Schedules. We
further conduct experiments to evaluate advantages of the
PO in single schedule without accumulated results from
previous schedules. As shown in Fig. 6, for different SIs, the
proﬁt created by PO is higher while the resource cost is
lower than HGS. We notice a trend in proﬁt enhancement
with the increase of SIs as more queries are admitted and
PO and HGS gain better knowledge to make scheduling
decisions. Experiment results show that PO can generate
less resource cost and create higher proﬁt not only for single
schedules, but also for each BDAA and the entire query
workload for all scheduling scenarios with detailed analysis
shown. In summary, we conclude that PO is the best proﬁt
optimization algorithm for the AaaS platform compared to
HGS, AILP, and AGS for Scheduling Scenario 1.
4.2.3
Resource Conﬁguration
The resource conﬁguration to execute the query workload
of PO and HGS is shown in Table 3. The results show that,
for all scheduling scenarios, PO can efﬁciently reduce the
numbers of VMs. This is because that PO can make full utili-
zation of the capacity of created resources. To achieve this,
PO gives priority to utilize earlier created VMs, which maxi-
mizes their utilization and helps to reduce the load in latter
created VMs for VM termination during periodic checks.
Creating more VMs will cause more delays [23] to serve
requests that may cause deadline violations and higher
costs. Thus, PO better serves our objectives of SLA guaran-
tee and cost saving.
4.2.4
Algorithm Running Time (ART)
We record the ART for PO, HGS, AILP and AGS to execute
the query workload, as shown in Fig. 7. For realtime sched-
uling, a small number of queries are scheduled based
on their arrivals. Thus, ART is not a limiting factor for all
algorithms since it only takes a few seconds to schedule
queries. For periodic scheduling, it takes few seconds for
AGS and HGS to schedule queries for all SIs. For AILP,
ART increases rapidly with the increase of SI, which tends
to reach a constant value, which is the timeout to run the
algorithm. For PO, ART is greatly reduced compared to
AILP. For 1 hour scheduling intervals, it takes an average
237 seconds to ﬁnish scheduling, which is sufﬁcient fast to
solve the scheduling problem. Thus, ART is not a limiting
factor for PO to serve as the scheduling algorithm for the
AaaS platform to solve the proﬁt optimization problem.
In summary, we conclude that PO is the best proﬁt op-
timization algorithm of the AaaS platform compared to
HGS, AILP, and AGS for Scheduling Scenario 1, which can
use less resources, generate less resource cost and create
higher proﬁt not only for each schedule, but also for each
BDAA and the entire query workload for all realtime and
periodic scheduling.
4.3
SLA and Data Splitting Based Resource
Scheduling
To overcome the limits of Scheduling Scenario 2 that users
have tight deadline and budget constraints of queries, data
splitting and sampling are utilized to enable approximate
query processing to trade-off accuracy for faster response
times and reduced resource costs. It is noted that the SPO
Fig. 6. Proﬁts and resource costs of PO and HGS algorithms for single
schedules.
TABLE 3
Resource Conﬁguration
Scheduling Scenario
HGS
PO
Real Time
56  r3. large
36  r3. large
SI ¼ 10
50  r3. large
33  r3. large
SI ¼ 20
42  r3. large
30  r3. large
SI ¼ 30
37  r3. large
25  r3. large
1  r3. xlarge
1  r3. xlarge
SI ¼ 40
32  r3. large,
1  r3. xlarge
26  r3. large
SI ¼ 50
27  r3. large
22  r3. large,
2  r3. xlarge
2  r3. xlarge
SI ¼ 60
25  r3. large,
19  r3. large,
1  r3. xlarge
1  r3. xlarge
Fig. 5. Proﬁts and resource costs of different BDAAs.
Fig. 7. ART of PO, HGS, AILP, and AGS algorithms.
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1247
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

algorithm serves general purpose by supporting different
data splitting and sampling techniques. To illustrate the efﬁ-
ciency and effectiveness of our proposed SPO algorithm, we
apply a normal distribution based data splitting method
based on our previous work that supports splitting-based
big data processing [7]. The ND splitting technique can be
replaced by other efﬁcient data processing techniques as
long as we can proﬁle the applications to know resource
conﬁgurations and processing times of the data splitting
and sampling methods so that the resource scheduler can
make the SLA-based proﬁt optimization decisions. We will
continue investigating efﬁcient data splitting and samping
techniques to support the AaaS platforms as part of the
future work.
The ND-based splitting technique works on normal dis-
tributed or near normal distributed datasets that contain at
least one numeric column and more numeric columns. It
applies a ND based splitting algorithm to generate split data-
sets as data representatives to improve the accuracy of data
analytics. The ND-based method can be efﬁciently applied to
data analysis for medical datasets and enable AaaS platforms
to return query results based on a single representative data
sample. The representative character of ND-based datasets is
evidenced by various medical datasets such as birth weight
distribution and body mass index. Applying ND-based split-
ting to analyze data representatives can provide relatively
comprehensive and accurate information than randomly
splitting. The inclusive character of ND-based data samples
can improve time efﬁciency, reduce resource costs, and
improve accuracy of big data analytics.
The datasets utilized for ND based scheduling are health
datasets, which contain the patient information and their
hospital records provided by the online sources with
records of patients’ marriage status, in-hospital duration,
etc [7]. The original health datasets are not sufﬁciently large
to apply the data splitting based scheduling method to
show its performance beneﬁts. Thus, the required resources
for data splitting are enlarged to a suitable scale based on
the original datasets. In this study, we generate 1 TB query
workload based on big data benchmark with splitting time
of health data source as the experimental data. We conduct
the following experiments to evaluate the performance of
data splitting based resource scheduling and non data-
splitting based resource scheduling.
4.3.1
Admission Control and SLA Guarantees
As indicated in Fig. 8, the admission rates of SPO for differ-
ent scheduling scenarios are in the range of [88, 90 percent],
which is approximately 6 percent higher compared to the
admission rates of PO in the range of [82, 84 percent]. The
ﬂuctuation of the admission rates is caused by the Poisson
arrival of the queries. The results show an overall signiﬁ-
cantly increased query admission rate. The reason is that
data-splitting based resource scheduling enables the AaaS
platform to admit queries whose analytical solutions can
not be generated due to tight deadlines and budgets con-
straints. Higher query admission rates bring more beneﬁts
to the AaaS platform with regards to market share enlarge-
ment and proﬁt enhancement.
4.3.2
Proﬁt Enhancement and Cost Saving
As shown in Fig. 9, we analyze the proﬁt enhancement and
cost saving, which are the key performance indicators of
scheduling algorithms SPO and PO.
1) Average Proﬁts and Resource Costs. With a 6 percent
higher acceptance rate, SPO creates an average proﬁt of
$7272, which is 2.6 times that of PO with an average
resource cost of $1033, which is 20 percent that of PO. The
results indicate a signiﬁcant proﬁt enhancement and cost
saving advantage of applying SPO. The reason is that data
splitting based scheduling leads to higher query admission
rate for higher query incomes as well as a lower resource
costs by processing data samples, which subsequently lead
to a signiﬁcant enhancement of proﬁt.
2) Proﬁts and Costs for Different Scenarios. Results
show SPO performs signiﬁcantly better than PO for all
scheduling scenarios including realtime scheduling and
periodic scheduling with SI from 10 minutes to 2 hours,
the proﬁts generated by SPO are in the range of [$7217,
$7351] while the proﬁts created by PO are in the range of
[$2559, $2863] based on the Amazon EC2 pricing model.
The resource costs of PO are [$5246, $4941] while the
resource costs of SPO are [$1002, $1088].
3) Performance Evaluation for Single Schedules. We
further analyze the performance of PO and SPO for one
schedule that is not affected by other scheduling intervals
or accumulated results. As shown in Fig. 10, we can see a
more rapid increasing trend of proﬁts created by SPO than
PO while the resource costs of PO increase much higher
than SPO as the scheduling interval increases from realtime
to a period of 120 minutes. The results show that for the
same scheduling intervals and same query arrival rates,
SPO steadily outperforms PO in terms of cost saving and
proﬁt
enhancement
for
all
scheduling
scenarios.
We
also identify that for realtime scheduling and periodic
Fig. 8. Admission rates of PO and SPO algorithms.
Fig. 9. Resource costs and proﬁts of PO and SPO algorithms.
1248
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

scheduling with SI of 10 and 20, the proﬁts created by PO
includes negative values that indicate that the accepted
queries can not fully utilize the cloud resources and the
query income can not cover the resource costs. Thus, fully
utilizing cloud resources with appropriate SI is important
for proﬁt enhancement.
4) Performance Evaluation for Different BDAAs. We
use SI ¼ 80 as the scheduling interval to analyze the perfor-
mance of PO and SPO. It is noted that at SI ¼ 80, SPO gener-
ates the lowest proﬁts while PO creates the highest proﬁts.
As shown in Fig. 11, as BDAA1 does not enable approxi-
mate query processing due to its accuracy requirements, the
proﬁt created by SPO is equal to the proﬁt created by PO.
For BDAA2, BDAA3, and BDAA4, approximate query proc-
essing is allowed to enable quicker responses and less
resource costs without strict accuracy requirements. The
query acceptance rates of different BDAAs are shown in
Table 4. Even for the best performance of PO while at the
worst performance of SPO, for BDAA2, BDAA3, and
BDAA4, with higher admission rates 10.6, 11.0, and 6.4 per-
cent accordingly, the proﬁts of SPO are 1.8, 1.9, and 1.7
times improved over PO while the resource costs of SPO are
5.3, 6.7, and 6.5 times lower than PO. We conclude that for
the other SIs, SPO can better outperform PO for cost saving
and proﬁt enhancement.
4.3.3
Resource Conﬁguration and Tight Deadline
Constraints
We identify that SPO always utilizes a higher number of
cloud resources for both realtime scheduling and periodic
scheduling, as shown in Table 5. The reason is that SPO
admits a higher number of queries than PO. For queries
with tight deadlines, new resources are required to execute
them simultaneously to avoid deadline violations. PO and
SPO both make optimal resource scheduling solutions. For
PO, as a proﬁt optimization algorithm, it has already made
the optimal scheduling solution to maximize the proﬁts,
minimize query processing times, and maximize resource
utilization based on relatively less admitted queries com-
pared to SPO. For SPO, although data splitting based sam-
pling enables the processing of smaller data samples to save
resource costs whilst reducing the required resource times,
the beneﬁts of resource time deduction due to less query
processing can not beat the tight deadline constraints of
query processing. Despite the fact that creating fewer
resources is beneﬁtial and preferable for AaaS platforms,
SPO creates a higher number of cloud resources for SLA
guarantees to meet tight deadline requirements.
4.3.4
Workload Running Time
Query workload running is the time for the AaaS platform to
ﬁnish processing the entire query workload. Results indicate
that SPO can ﬁnish processing the query workload within
500 hours for both realtime and periodic scheduling, as
shown in Fig. 12. However, for PO it takes from 1750 hours
to 2500 hours to process the queries, which is 3 to 5 times that
of SPO. The results show that SPO can signiﬁcantly reduce
query processing times, which better serves the goals of
Fig. 10. Proﬁts and resource costs of PO and SPO algorithms for single
schedules.
Fig. 11. Proﬁts and resource costs of PO and SPO algorithms for BDAAs
with SI ¼ 80.
TABLE 4
Query Admission and SLA Guarantee
Rate
BDAA1
BDAA2
BDAA3
BDAA4
SPO
65.3
98.9
99.0
95.2
PO
65.3
89.5
89.2
89.5
TABLE 5
Resource Conﬁguration
Scheduling Scenario
PO
SPO
Realtime
63  r3. large
75  r3. large
SI ¼ 10
59  r3. large
72  r3. large
SI ¼ 20
57 r3. large
66  r3. large
SI ¼ 30
60  r3. large
63 r3. large
SI ¼ 40
53  r3. large
58 r3. large
SI ¼ 50
52  r3. large
59 r3. large
SI ¼ 60
51  r3. large
55  r3. large
SI ¼ 70
50 r3. larger
53  r3.larger
1  r3.xlarge
1  r3. xlarge
SI ¼ 80
49 r3. large
53 r3. large
SI ¼ 90
49 r3.larger
52 r3.large,
1  r3. xlarge
1  r3. xlarge
SI ¼ 100
43  r3.large,
46 r3.large,
2  r3. xlarge
2  r3. xlarge
SI ¼ 110
41 r3.1large,
45  r3.large,
SI ¼ 120
1  r3. xlarge
1  r3.xlarge
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1249
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

AaaS platforms for performance enhancements and improve
user satisfaction.
4.3.5
Algorithm Running Time
For ART, as shown in Fig. 13, we observe that both PO and
SPO can produce scheduling solutions in a timely manner for
both realtime and periodic scheduling with SI from 10 minutes
and 120 minutes. The average ART for PO for different SIs
is between [0.011, 0.767] seconds, while the ART for SPO is
between [0.007, 225.313] seconds. We note that ART for PO
exhibits a relatively stable trend while we notice a signiﬁcant
increase in the average ART of SPO for SI ¼ 72. Through
further analysis of the experiement results, we identify two
scheduling intervals reached by the system-deﬁned schedul-
ing timeout. The returned scheduling solutions of SPO may
be sub-optimal solutions it has found thusfar to fulﬁll SLA
requirements.
For unexpected extreme high numbers of query arrivals,
if there is no optimal solution found, both PO and SPO can
switch to heuristic methods to generate scheduling solu-
tions to fulﬁll tight deadline requirements as the heuristic
algorithms that have been reﬁned multiple times can deliver
near-optimal scheduling solutions. The ART is not a limit-
ing factor for both SPO and PO to deliver timely and
satisfactory scheduling solutions for all use cases.
We focus on reducing the ART of the optimization sched-
uling algorithms through a reﬁned problem formulation
that introduces less variables and constraints in the ILP
model with reduced input scales by applying several heu-
ristic algorithms to input near-optimal resource conﬁgura-
tions to PO and SPO. The reduced problem and input scale
enable PO and SPO to generate timely proﬁt optimization
scheduling solutions for large query arrivals.
5
RELATED WORK
Analyzing big data to ﬁnd potential insights in the data is
essential for individuals, organizations, and governments to
make better decisions. AaaS platforms aim to deliver on-
demand analytics services to various domains of users at
lower cost with SLA guarantees in clouds. Our research
focuses on providing effective and efﬁcient scheduling algo-
rithms to support the AaaS platform. We compare our work
with most related works and detail the comparisons based
on various parameters in Table 6.
Zhao et al. [6] propose an admission control and resource
scheduling algorithm to increase proﬁts for AaaS providers
by offering a cost-effective and SLA-guaranteed resource
scheduling solution. Zhao et al. [8] further propose a proﬁt-
optimization scheduling algorithm to maximize proﬁts for
the AaaS platform while minimizing query response times
with SLA guarantees. This work futher address the chal-
lenge of resource scheduling for big data processing with
limited deadlines and budgets by proposing a data-splitting
and task-dependency based admission control and proﬁt
optimization algorithm.
Mian et al. [24] focus on resource provisioning for data
analytic workloads in a public cloud that aims to ﬁnd cost-
effective conﬁguration using heuristic scheduling algorithms.
Their work schedules queries for one application while
allowing SLA violations to trade-for a cheaper resource cost,
which is different from our SLA guaranteeing perspective.
Sfrent et al. [25] propose asymptotic scheduling for many
tasks computing in big data platforms to maximize the num-
ber of the jobs that can be processed and do not consider
SLA guarantees. Sun et al. [5] propose a general-purpose
analytic framework to provision cost-effective solution for
multi-tenancy scenarios. However, they do not consider
admission control or address scheduling algorithms with
SLA guarantees.
There are extensive works on workﬂow scheduling.
Kllapi et al. [26] address the traditional workﬂow schedul-
ing problem with time and money optimality. Zulkernine
et al. [27] propose a conceptual architecture of cloud-based
Analytics-as-a-Service, which does not consider admission
control. Zhang et al. [28] propose multi-objective scheduling
for many tasks to reduce overhead times and ﬁnding a near
optimal solution.
Resource provisioning for MapReduce tasks is a well-
explored research area, which targets at a speciﬁc application
model and does not serve general data analytics purposes.
Tang et al. [29] propose a self-adaptive scheduling algorithm
to reduce the start time of the reduce task of MapReduce.
Alrokayan et al. [30] adopt Lambda architecture and focus
Fig. 12. Workload running times of PO and SPO algorithms
Fig. 13. ART of PO and SPO algorithms.
TABLE 6
Related Works
Parameter
6 7 8 24 26 30 31 27 49 50 51 52 53 Our Work
AaaS
Y N Y N N N N Y N N N N N
Y
Cost saving
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y
Y
Budget
Y N Y N Y Y Y N N N N N N
Y
Deadline
Y N Y N Y Y Y N N N N N N
Y
Admission control
Y N Y N N N N N N N Y N N
Y
Scalable provision
Y N Y Y N N N Y Y Y Y N N
Y
Automatic provision Y N Y N N N N N N N N Y N
Y
Data Locality Aware Y N Y Y N N Y N Y Y N N Y
Y
Data splitting
N Y N N N N N N N N N N N
Y
Diff-dependencies
N N N N N N N N N N N N N
Y
SLA guarantee
Y N Y N N Y N Y N N Y Y N
Y
Proﬁt optimization
N N Y N N N N N N N N N N
Y
Y: Covered; N: Not Covered.
1250
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

their work on the batch layer to offer cost-aware and SLA-
based algorithms for scheduling MapReduce tasks. Bicer et al.
[31] propose a modeling-driven resource allocation frame-
work to support time and cost sensitive execution for MapRe-
duce applications.
There have been serveral cloud enterprises delivering data
analytics services. Amazon offers data analytics web services
such as Elastic MapReduce [32] that is a service to enable eas-
ily and cost-effectively process of big data. Amazon charges
users for the cloud resources and the managed MapReduce
services. Google offers Big Query [33], which is a fully man-
aged Database-as-a-Service for large-scale data analytics. IBM
provides BigInsights [34], which is a Hadoop-as-a-Service
to offers the performance and security of an on-premises
deployment.
There have been a number of research works focus on
leveraging Database-as-a-Service. Relational Cloud [35] is a
project that investigates technologies and challenges related
to Database-as-a-Service in clouds. Agarwal et al. [36] pro-
pose BlinkDB for approximate query processing on large
datasets with bounded response time and bounded errors.
Narasayya et al. [37] propose SQLVM to provision multi-
tenant
relational
Database-as-a-Service
in
multi-tenant
Microsoft Azure SQL Database. Ahmad et al. [38] propose
interaction-aware scheduling for report generation work-
loads to maximize database performance.
Li et al. [39] propose Big Provision, a provisioning frame-
work, to effectively conﬁgure big data analytics systems.
Chen et al. [40] address the challenges of delivering conti-
nuous Analytics-as-a-Service for realtime events. Wong et al.
[41] propose Thrifty for parallel processing Database-
as-a-Service to achieve a lower total cost with SLA guaran-
tees on query results.
There are several widely used data analytics frameworks
that support big data processing. The big data analytic
frameworks that are studied in our work are Shark, Hive,
Impala, and Tez/Stinger, which are built on top of the
Hadoop Distributed File System [42]. Hadoop is an open-
source software framework for reliable, scalable, and
distributed computing. Shark is a new module in Spark,
which allows interactive SQL on Hadoop systems [43].
Spark is an open-source fast computing framework to pro-
vide an easy-to-use programming model and leverages
various applications [44]. Hive provides ad hoc query proc-
essing and summarizing of data on a data warehouse infra-
structure [45]. Impala brings scalable parallel database
technology to Hadoop, enabling multi-tenancy and low-
latency SQL queries [46]. Tez offers fast processing speed
and data scalability to execute batch and interactive tasks
[47]. Ousterhout et al. [48] systematically identify the perfor-
mance bottlenecks of data analytics frameworks to quantify
bottlenecks to enable researchers and practitioners make
performance improvements.
There have been a number of related works for resource
scheduling focus on different perspectives, scenarios, and
techniques. Wang et al. [49] proposed a data-aware work
stealing technique that is able to achieve efﬁcient load bal-
ancing with data-aware scheduling. Xia et al. [50] studied a
collaboration- and fairness-aware big data management
problem to fairly place continuously generated data to dis-
tributed datacenters. Garg et al. [51] manage resources for
heterogeneous workload in a datacenter and schedule
resources for mixed workloads. Garcia et al. [52] introduce
Cloudcompaas, a SLA-aware PaaS cloud platform to man-
age the complete resource lifecycle and offers a generic SLA
model for cloud providers. However, this work does not
consider big data analytics but general cloud computing
applications. Among the related research works, Gu et al.
[53] study the cost minimization problem for big data
processing in distributed cloud datacenters. However, this
work does not consider QoS requirements, SLA, or cost
optimization.
There are an extensive number of works focusing on
delivering speciﬁc Analytics-as-a-Services, which enriches
the BDAAs and services of AaaS platforms. Zhang et al. [7]
propose ND-based data splitting methods for large medical
data processing in clouds. This approach splits large data-
sets to obtain smaller representative data for processing
thereby offering higher ﬂexibility, less resource costs, and
faster response times. Tordini et al. [54], [55] proposed data
splitting techniques to process next generation sequencing
datasets for complex workﬂows, which keep a high level of
query accuracy.
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Resource scheduling has signiﬁcant meaning for AaaS plat-
forms to maximize proﬁts while delivering satisfactory
AaaS to users with SLA guarantees. We model and formu-
late the data-splitting based resource scheduling problem.
Moreover, we propose the admission control and proﬁt
optimization resource scheduling algorithms, which enable
big data analytics with limited budgets and tight deadlines
and provide proﬁt optimized scheduling solutions with
minimized query times and SLA guarantees. Furthermore,
we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the proposed algoritms under different schedul-
ing scenarios including realtime and periodic scheduling
with varied SIs. Experimental evaluations show the admis-
sion control algorithm allows effective query admission
while PO performs signiﬁcantly better than HGS, AILP,
and AGS in cost saving and proﬁt enhancement in single
schedule, for each BDAA, and for the entire query work-
load. PO can better serve the proﬁt maximization objectives
while delivering AaaS services with SLA guarantees for
query processing with full accuracy requirements for
Scheduling Scenario 1.
Moreover, we evaluate the performance of SPO with
comparison to PO. The results show SPO signiﬁcantly
increases the proﬁts, reduces the resource costs, increases
query admission rates, and decreases query processing
times. SPO is a promising scheduling algorithm that lever-
ages big data processing with limited budgets and tight
deadlines and enables users to obtain time and cost effective
analytical solutions for efﬁcient decision making for Sched-
uling Scenario 2.
As part of the future work, we will continue working on
1) studying approximation query processing, 2) proposing
effective data splitting and sampling techniques, 3) propos-
ing SLA-based resource scheduling algorithms to allow
query processing on large datasets with faster response
times and reduced resource costs.
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1251
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Dr. Bingsheng He and the
reviewers of 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data for their helpful feedback.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Lavalle, E. Lesser, R. Shockley, M. S. Hopkins, and N. Kruschwitz,
“Big data, analytics and the path from insights to value,” MIT Sloan
Mana. Rev., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 21–32, 2011.
[2]
X. Jin, B. W. Wah, X. Cheng, and Y. Wang, “Signiﬁcance and chal-
lenges of big data research,” Big Data Res., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 59–64,
2015.
[3]
I. A. T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N. Badrul Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. Gani,
and S. Ullah Khan, “The rise of ‘big data’ on cloud computing:
Review and open research issues,” Inf. Syst., vol. 47, pp. 98–115, 2014.
[4]
C. Ji, Y. Li, W. Qiu, U. Awada, and K. Li, “Big data processing in
cloud computing environments,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Pervasive Syst.
Algorithms Netw., 2012, pp. 17–23.
[5]
X. Sun, B. Gao, L. Fan, and W. An, “A cost-effective approach to
delivering analytics as a service,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Web
Services, 2012, pp. 512–519.
[6]
Y. Zhao, R. N. Calheiros, G. Gange, K. Ramamohanarao, and
R. Buyya, “SLA-Based resource scheduling for big data analytics
as a service in cloud computing environments,” in Proc. 44th IEEE
Int. Conf. Parallel Process., 2015, pp. 510–519.
[7]
H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Pang, and J. He, “Splitting large medical
data sets based on normal distribution in cloud environment,”
IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., 2015, doi: 10.1109/TCC.2015.2462361.
[8]
Y. Zhao, R. N. Calheiros, J. Bailey, and R. Sinnott, “SLA-based
proﬁt optimization for resource management of big data analytics-
as-a-service platforms in cloud computing environments,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2016, pp. 432–441.
[9]
[Online]. Available: http://spark.apache.org
[10] R. Benayoun, J. De Montgolﬁer, J. Tergny, and O. Laritchev,
“Linear programming with multiple objective functions: Step
method (STEM),” Math. Program., vol. 1, pp. 366–375, 1971.
[11] M. Benichou, J. Gauthier, and P. Girodet, “Experiments in mixed-
integer linear programming,” Math. Program., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 76–94,
1971.
[12] H. Isermann, “Linear lexicographic optimization,” OR Spektrum,
vol. 4, pp. 223–228, 1982.
[13] [Online]. Available: http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/
[14] [Online]. Available: https://amplab.cs.berkeley.edu/benchmark/
[15] M. K. A. B. V. Bittorf, T. Bobrovytsky, C. C. A. C. J. Erickson, M. G. D.
Hecht, M. J. I. J. L. Kuff, D. K. A. Leblang, N. L. I. P. H. Robinson,
D. R. S. Rus, J. R. D. T. S. Wanderman, and M. M. Yoder, “Impala: A
modern, open-source SQL engine for hadoop,” in Proc. 7th Biennial
Conf. Innovative Data Syst. Res., 2015.
[16] S. Shenker, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, and R. Xin, “Shark: SQL and rich
analytics at scale,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Mana. Data,
2013, pp. 13–24.
[17] A. Thusoo, J. Sarma, N. Jain, and Z. Shao, “Hive: A warehousing
solution over a map-reduce framework,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1626–1629, 2009.
[18] B. Saha, H. Shah, S. Seth, G. Vijayaraghavan, A. Murthy, and C. Curino,
“Apache tez: A unifying framework for modeling and building data
processing applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Mana. Data,
2015, pp. 1357–1369.
[19] J. Schad, J. Dittrich, and J.-A. Quiane-Ruiz, “Runtime measure-
ments in the cloud: Observing, analyzing, and reducing variance,”
Proc. VLDB Endow, vol. 3, no. 1–2, pp. 460–471, 2010.
[20] R. N. Calheiros and R. Buyya, “Cost-effective provisioning and
scheduling of deadline-constrained applications in hybrid clouds,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Inf. Syst. Engineering, 2012, pp. 171–184.
[21] [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/
downloads/ws/ilogcplex/
[22] R. N. Calheiros, R. Ranjan, A. Beloglazov, C. A. F. De Rose, and
R. Buyya, “CloudSim: A toolkit for modeling and simulation of
cloud computing environments and evaluation of resource pro-
visioning algorithms,” Softw.: Practice Experience, vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 23–50, 2011.
[23] M. Mao and M. Humphrey, “A performance study on the VM
startup time in the cloud,” in Proc. IEEE Fifth Int. Conf. Cloud Com-
put., 2012, pp. 423–430.
[24] R. Mian, P. Martin, and J. Vazquez-Poletti, “Provisioning data
analytic workloads in a cloud,” Future Generation Comput. Syst.,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1452–1458, 2013.
[25] A. Sfrent and F. Pop, “Asymptotic scheduling for many task com-
puting in big data platforms,” Inf. Sci., vol. 319, pp. 71–91, 2015.
[26] H. Kllapi, E. Sitaridi, M. M. Tsangaris, and Y. Ioannidis, “Schedule
optimization for data processing ﬂows on the cloud,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mana. Data - SIGMOD, 2011, pp. 289–300.
[27] F. Zulkernine, P. Martin, Y. Zou, M. Bauer, F. Gwadry-Sridhar,
and A. Aboulnaga, “Towards cloud-based analytics-as-a-service
(CLAaaS) for big data analytics in the cloud,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Congr. Big Data, 2013, pp. 62–69.
[28] F. Zhang, J. Cao, K. Li, S. U. Khan, and K. Hwang, “Multi-objective
scheduling of many tasks in cloud platforms,” Future Generation
Comput. Syst., vol. 37, pp. 309–320, 2014.
[29] Z. Tang, L. Jiang, J. Zhou, K. Li, and K. Li, “A self-adaptive sched-
uling algorithm for reduce start time,” Future Generation Comput.
Syst., vol. 43–44, pp. 51–60, 2015.
[30] M. Alrokayan, A. Vahid Dastjerdi and R. Buyya, “SLA-aware provi-
sioning and scheduling of cloud resources for big data analytics,” in
Prof. IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Emerging Markets, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[31] T. Bicer, D. Chiu, and G. Agrawal, “Time and cost sensitive data-
intensive computing on hybrid clouds,” in Proc. 12th IEEE/ACM
Int. Symp. Cluster Cloud Grid Comput., 2012, pp. 636–643.
[32] [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce/
[33] [Online]. Available: https://Cloud.google.com/bigquery/
[34] [Online]. Available: http://www-03.ibm.com/software/products/
en/ibm-biginsights-for-apache-hadoop
[35] [Online]. Available: http://relationalcloud.com
[36] S. Agarwal, B. Mozafari, A. Panda, H. Milner, S. Madden, and
I. Stoica, “BlinkDB: Queries with bounded errors and bounded
response times on very large data,” in Proc. 8th ACM Eur. Conf.
Comput. Syst., 2013, Art. no. 29.
[37] V. Narasayya, S. Das, M. Syamala, B. Chandramouli, and
S. Chaudhuri, “SQLVM: Performance isolation in multi-tenant
relational database-as-a-service,” in Proc. 6th Biennial Conf. Innova-
tive Data Syst. Res., 2013.
[38] M.
Ahmad,
A.
Aboulnaga,
S.
Babu,
and
K.
Munagala,
“Interaction-aware scheduling of report-generation workloads,”
VLDB J., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 589–615, 2011.
[39] H. Li, K. Lu, and S. Meng, “BigProvision: A provisioning frame-
work for big data analytics,” IEEE Netw., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 50–56,
Sep.-Oct. 2015.
[40] Q. Chen, M. Hsu, and H. Zeller, “Experience in continuous analyt-
ics as a service,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Extending Database Technol.,
2011, Art. no. 509.
[41] P. Wong, Z. He, and E. Lo, “Parallel analytics as a service,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mana. Data - SIGMOD, 2013, Art. no. 25.
[42] K. Shvachko, H. Kuang, S. Radia, and R. Chansler, “The hadoop
distributed ﬁle system,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Symp. Mass Storage
Syst. Technol., 2010, pp. 1–10.
[43] C. Engle, A. Lupher, R. Xin, M. Zaharia, M. J. Franklin, S. Shenker,
and I. Stoica, “Shark,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mana. Data, 2012, Art. no. 689.
[44] M. Zaharia, M. Chowdhury, T. Das, A. Dave, and J. Ma, “Fast and
interactive analytics over hadoop data with spark,” USENIX
Login, vol. 37, no. 4: pp. 45–51, 2012.
[45] A. Thusoo, J. Sen Sarma, N. Jain, Z. Shao, P. Chakka, S. Anthony,
H. Liu, P. Wyckoff, and R. Murthy, “Hive,” Proc. VLDB Endow-
ment, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1626–1629, Aug. 2009.
[46] T. Liu, M. Martonosi, T. Liu, and M. Martonosi, “Impala: A mid-
dleware system for managing autonomic, parallel sensor systems
ting,” in Proc. 9th ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Principles Practice Parallel
Program., 2003, Art. no. 107.
[47] [Online]. Available: http://zh.hortonworks.com/hadoop/tez/
[48] K. Ousterhout, P. Wendell, M. Zaharia, and I. Stoica, “Sparrow :
Distributed, low latency scheduling,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Operat-
ing Syst. Principles, 2013, pp. 69–84k.
[49] K. Wang, X. Zhou, T. Li, D. Zhao, M. Lang, and I. Raicu,
“Optimizing load balancing and data-locality with data-aware
scheduling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2015, pp. 119–128.
[50] Q. Xia, Z. Xu, W. Liang, and A. Y. Zomaya, “Collaboration- and
fairness-aware big data management in distributed clouds,” IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 1941–1953, Jul. 2015.
[51] S. K. Garg, A. N. Toosi, S. K. Gopalaiyengar, and R. Buyya,
“SLA-based virtual machine management for heterogeneous
workloads in a cloud datacenter,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 45,
pp. 108–120, 2014.
1252
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 9, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

[52] A. G. Garcia, I. Blanquer Espert, and V. Hernandez Garcıa, “SLA-
driven dynamic cloud resource management,” Future Generation
Comput. Syst., vol. 31, pp. 1–11, 2014.
[53] L. Gu, D. Zeng, P. Li, and S. Guo, “Cost minimization for big data
processing in geo-distributed data centers,” IEEE Trans. Emerging
Topics Comput., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 314–323, Sep. 2014.
[54] F. Tordini, M. Aldinucci, P. Viviani, I. Merelli, and P. Lio, “Scientiﬁc
workﬂows on clouds with heterogeneous and preemptible
instances,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Parallel Comput., 2017, pp. 605–614.
[55] F. Tordini, “A cloud solution for multiomics data integration,” in
Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Scalable Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 559–566.
Yali Zhao received the bachelor’s degree in soft-
ware engineering, the master’s degree in software
engineering, the master’s degree in enterprise
computing
and
engineering,
she
is
currently
working toward the PhD degree in the University of
Melbourne, Australia. Her research interest is SLA-
based resource scheduling for big data analytic-as-
a-service in cloud computing environments.
Rodrigo N. Calheiros is a lecturer in the School
of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics,
Western Sydney University, Australia. He works
in the ﬁeld of Cloud computing and related areas
since 2008, and since then he carried out R&D
supporting research in the area. His research
interests also include big data, internet of things,
and their application.
Graeme Gange is a lecturer at Monash Univer-
sity. His research interests include discrete opti-
mization, particularly integration of constraint
programming, SAT and SMT techniques, as well
as development of static analysis and program
veriﬁcation techniques.
James Bailey received the PhD degree from the
University of Melbourne, in 1998. He is currently an
Australian Research Council Future fellow in
the Department of Computing and Information
Systems, University of Melbourne. He has previ-
ously held appointments at Kings College, Birkbeck
College, and The University of London. His
research interests are in the area of data mining
and machine learning, with a focus on both funda-
mental topics such as contrast pattern mining
and data clustering, as well as application
aspects in areas such as health informatics and
bioinformatics.
Richard O. Sinnott received the BSc degree
in theoretical physics (Hons), the MSc degree in
software engineering and the PhD degree in
computing science. He is the director of eRe-
search at the University of Melbourne and profes-
sor of Applied Computing Systems. He has been
lead software engineer/architect on an extensive
portfolio of national and international projects,
with speciﬁc focus on research domains requiring
ﬁner-grained access control (security). Prior to
coming to Melbourne, he was the Technical
director of the UK National e-Science Centre; director of e-Science at
the University of Glasgow; deputy director (Technical) for the Bioinfor-
matics Research Centre also at the University of Glasgow, and for a
while the technical director of the National Centre for e-Social Science.
He has more than 300 peer-reviewed publications across a range of
computing and application-speciﬁc domains.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.
ZHAO ET AL.: SLA-BASED PROFIT OPTIMIZATION RESOURCE SCHEDULING FOR BIG DATA ANALYTICS-AS-A-SERVICE PLATFORMS...
1253
Authorized licensed use limited to: the Leddy Library at the University of Windsor. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 14:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
