Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting
Workloads for Improved Resource Management in
Large Cloud Platforms∗
Eli Cortez
Microsoft
eli.cortez@microsoft.com
Anand Bonde
Microsoft Research
abonde@microsoft.com
Alexandre Muzio
ITA, Brazil
alemuzio@aluno.ita.br
Mark Russinovich
Microsoft
mark.russinovich@microsoft.com
Marcus Fontoura
Microsoft
marcusfo@microsoft.com
Ricardo Bianchini
Microsoft Research
ricardob@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Cloud research to date has lacked data on the characteris-
tics of the production virtual machine (VM) workloads of
large cloud providers. A thorough understanding of these
characteristics can inform the providers’ resource manage-
ment systems, e.g. VM scheduler, power manager, server
health manager. In this paper, we first introduce an exten-
sive characterization of Microsoft Azure’s VM workload,
including distributions of the VMs’ lifetime, deployment size,
and resource consumption. We then show that certain VM
behaviors are fairly consistent over multiple lifetimes, i.e.
history is an accurate predictor of future behavior. Based on
this observation, we next introduce Resource Central (RC),
a system that collects VM telemetry, learns these behaviors
offline, and provides predictions online to various resource
managers via a general client-side library. As an example of
RC’s online use, we modify Azure’s VM scheduler to leverage
predictions in oversubscribing servers (with oversubscrib-
able VM types), while retaining high VM performance. Using
real VM traces, we then show that the prediction-informed
schedules increase utilization and prevent physical resource
exhaustion. We conclude that providers can exploit their
workloads’ characteristics and machine learning to improve
resource management substantially.
∗Cortez and Bonde contributed equally. Muzio was an intern at Microsoft.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5085-3/17/10...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3132747.3132772
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computer systems organization →Cloud comput-
ing; • Computing methodologies →Machine learning
approaches;
KEYWORDS
Cloud workloads, machine learning, predictive management
ACM Reference Format:
Eli Cortez, Anand Bonde, Alexandre Muzio, Mark Russinovich,
Marcus Fontoura, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2017. Resource Central:
Understanding and Predicting Workloads for Improved Resource
Management in Large Cloud Platforms. In Proceedings of SOSP’17.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3132747.
3132772
1
INTRODUCTION
Motivation. Cloud computing has been expanding at a fast
pace, especially as enterprises continue to move their opera-
tions to large cloud providers such as Microsoft Azure, Ama-
zon Web Services (AWS), and Google Cloud Platform (GCP).
Due to heated marketplace competition, providers have been
under pressure to produce attractive features and services,
while controlling their datacenter costs. These factors com-
bine to expose providers to a wide variety of workloads (from
both external customers and their own internal services) that
must share a common datacenter infrastructure. Providing
good performance, availability, and reliability under these
conditions can be expensive without sophisticated (but prac-
tical and scalable) resource management.
Unfortunately, research on cloud resource management
to date has lacked a thorough understanding of the key char-
acteristics of the workloads of large commercial providers.
For example, no prior study has explored the lifetime (time
between creation and termination) or resource consumption
distributions of these providers’ production virtual machines

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
(VMs). Instead, the prior work has mostly used real but non-
VM workloads, synthetic VM workloads, and/or focused on
managing resources via general but often impractical tech-
niques for a large cloud provider. For example, many papers
explore (sometimes offline) workload profiling and aggres-
sive online resource reallocation, via dynamic monitoring,
scheduling, and/or live VM migration [2, 7, 20, 21, 24, 27]. In
practice, offline profiling is infeasible because the workloads’
inputs are often unavailable until VMs run in production.
Online profiling is challenging, as it is hard to determine
when an arbitrary VM has shown representative behavior.
Application-level performance (e.g., tail latency) monitoring
is usually not possible, as it requires help from applications.
Finally, live migration retains contended resources for a rela-
tively long time (e.g., it cannot free up memory pages before
successfully migrating them) and can cause widespread net-
work traffic bursts. Practical uses of these techniques require
extreme care.
We argue that resource management can become more ef-
fective and practical for large providers with a deeper under-
standing of their VM workloads’ key characteristics. More-
over, if these characteristics can be accurately predicted, im-
provements could be even greater. For example, accurately
predicting resource utilization at VM deployment time would
allow resource-contention-aware VM co-location (mitigat-
ing the need for VM migration). Similarly, run-time lifetime
predictions would allow the health management system to
estimate when all the VMs running on a misbehaving server
will likely terminate (facilitating server maintenance with-
out VM migration or downtime). We are unaware of prior
work showing that the characteristics of large providers’ pro-
duction VMs can be accurately predicted for better resource
management.
Thus, there is a need for software that can produce such
predictions and enable the providers’ resource management
systems (e.g., the VM scheduler, the server health manager)
to leverage them. Some prediction-serving systems [5, 6, 10]
have been proposed recently, but have not been studied in
the context of prediction-based resource management.
Our work. In this paper, we first introduce a characteri-
zation of Azure’s (first- and third-party) VM workload, in-
cluding distributions of the VMs’ size, lifetime, resource
consumption, utilization pattern, and deployment size. Re-
searchers can use these distributions to produce realistic
cloud workloads for their own work. Alternatively, they
can use the sanitized production traces we have placed at
https://github.com/Azure/AzurePublicDataset. The traces con-
tain a subset of our data, but exhibit roughly the same overall
trends as the full dataset.
Our characterization shows that many types of VM be-
havior are fairly consistent over multiple lifetimes, when
observed from the perspective of each cloud customer. This
observation suggests that prior history may be an accurate
predictor of the future behavior of the customers’ VMs, so
machine learning algorithms could be used online to produce
VM behavior predictions.
Based on this observation, we introduce Resource Central
(RC), a system that collects VM telemetry, periodically learns
these behaviors into prediction models offline, and provides
behavior predictions online to various resource management
systems. Unlike other systems, RC serves predictions from a
client-side library, which caches prediction results, models,
and feature data. The library API is simple yet general, so it
can be used with many types of resource managers, learning
algorithms, prediction models, and feature data. RC’s models
and feature data are currently in production, being used
manually by engineers and data scientists for analysis and
system design. The changes to the systems that will leverage
RC are still being productized.
As an example of RC’s online use, we describe our modi-
fications to Azure’s VM scheduler, which selects a physical
server for each new VM. Specifically, we modify the sched-
uler to collect high-percentile utilization predictions to use
in oversubscribing physical servers with “oversubscribable”
VM types (e.g., first-party VMs that run non-customer-facing
workloads), while retaining good VM performance.
Our evaluation starts by quantifying the accuracy of RC’s
predictions of six metrics, using our VM telemetry. The re-
sults show overall prediction accuracies between 79% and
90%, depending on the metric. For example, RC predicts the
average CPU utilization of a new VM with 81% accuracy.
We then quantify the performance of RC’s components, and
confirm that models and feature data are compact and fast
enough to be executed on the client-side. To evaluate the
benefit of predictions, we explore our modified VM scheduler
using real VM traces and simulation. Our results show that
prediction-informed VM schedules enable safe oversubscrip-
tion, while keeping VM deployment failures low.
Summary and conclusions. Our contributions are:
• We present a detailed characterization of several VM work-
load behaviors from Microsoft Azure;
• We show that these behaviors can be accurately predicted;
• We describe Resource Central, a large-scale system for
producing, storing, and using such predictions;
• We describe modifications to Azure’s VM scheduler that
leverage predictions to improve server selection;
• We present extensive results evaluating Resource Central
and our modified VM scheduler; and
• We make a large VM dataset available to the community.
We conclude that cloud providers can exploit the charac-
teristics of their workloads and machine learning techniques
to improve resource management substantially.

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
2
RELATED WORK
Cloud VM workload characterization. We are unaware
of other characterizations of the VM workload of real public
cloud providers, except for [15] which focused solely on
resource demand volatility and pricing. Other works studied
cloud platform performance [16] and how users implement
their front-end services in the cloud [11].
The closest prior works [8, 19, 22] did not address public
cloud workloads. Rather, they characterized a month-long
trace of 12k bare-metal servers running first-party container-
based (i.e., non-VM) workloads at Google [25]. In contrast, we
characterize Azure’s entire VM workload over three months,
including third-party VMs. In fact, third-party VMs often
exhibit different characteristics than first-party ones, as we
show in Section 3.
More importantly, VM workloads fundamentally differ
from bare-metal container workloads. Mainly for security
reasons, public cloud providers must encapsulate their cus-
tomers’ workloads using VMs. Unfortunately, VMs impose
higher creation/termination overheads than containers run-
ning on bare metal, so they are likely to live longer, pro-
duce lower resource utilization, and be deployed in smaller
numbers. For example, a user who wants to run multiple
MapReduce jobs may create a set of VMs sized for the jobs’
maximum resource needs; she would only destroy/shutdown
the VMs when all jobs have completed. In a container-based
system, each map and reduce task of each job would likely
receive a different container, which can be more accurately
sized for its task. As another example, services that assign a
VM to each user (e.g., gaming) may pool and reuse VMs, so
that the overhead of VM creation becomes invisible to users.
Machine learning and prediction-serving systems. Prior
works have recently proposed several frameworks, such as
TensorFlow [1], Caffe [13], and MLLib [18], for producing
machine learning models. Our work is orthogonal to them,
as RC relies on TLC, a Microsoft-internal state-of-the-art
framework that implements many learning algorithms.
Instead, RC is comparable to recent prediction-serving
systems [5, 6, 10]. In contrast with these systems, RC caches
prediction results, models, and feature data on the client side.
This approach enables the system to operate even when the
data store or the connectivity to it is unavailable. In addition,
it provides higher performance by removing the interconnect
and store from the critical performance path.
Predicting cloud workloads. The literature on predicting
workload behaviors is extensive. These works predict re-
source demand, resource utilization, or job/task length for
provisioning or scheduling purposes [4, 9, 12, 14, 23]. In con-
trast, we predict a broader set of VM behaviors (including VM
lifetimes, maximum deployment sizes, and workload classes)
for a broader set of purposes (including health management
and power capping [26]). Most importantly, our prediction
results derive from a real cloud platform, its workload and
machine learning framework.
Prediction-based scheduling. The literature on task/conta-
iner/VM scheduling is also vast. Many of these works use
online predictions of resource usage or performance interfer-
ence [3, 7, 20, 27]. Unfortunately, they are often impractical
for a large provider, relying on (offline or online) workload
profiling, application-level performance monitoring, short-
term load predictions, and/or aggressive resource realloca-
tion (e.g., via live migration). Live migration is particularly
problematic, as it retains contended server resources and may
produce traffic bursts; it is better to place VMs where they
can stay. Thus, as an example of RC’s online use, we propose
changes to Azure’s VM scheduler that leverage predictions
of long-term high-percentile resource usage to implement
oversubscription in a safe and practical manner.
To guarantee within-server performance isolation across
VMs, we also need mechanisms for interference detection
(e.g., hardware counters [20, 27]) and prevention (e.g., fine-
grained resource partitioning [17]), but they are orthogonal
to our work. For example, Heracles (fine) and RC (coarse) op-
erate at different granularities and time-scales. RC is needed
in first placing VMs on servers, so Heracles does not have
to overly punish whatever workloads are considered low-
priority on the chosen server.
3
CHARACTERIZING CLOUD VM
WORKLOADS
We now explore several aspects of Azure’s VM workload.
Understanding them enables many platform optimizations.
Context and terminology. Azure hosts both first- and
third-party workloads, split into Infrastructure as a Service
(IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) VMs. In Azure’s offer-
ing, PaaS defines functional roles for VMs, e.g. Web server
VM, worker VM.
The first-party workloads comprise internal VMs (e.g., re-
search/development, infrastructure management) and first-
party services (e.g., communication, gaming, data manage-
ment) offered to third-party customers. The third-party work-
loads are VMs created by external customers. Other than the
limited information contained in our dataset (details below),
we have no visibility into third-party uses of internal services
or third-party workloads. The dataset corresponds to many
tens of millions of VMs from many tens of thousands of first-
and third-party users. 1
Regardless of their first- or third-party status, customers
create one or more Azure subscriptions. After creating a
subscription, the customer can deploy VMs into a region
1Due to confidentiality reasons, we omit certain exact numbers, instead
focusing on more relevant workload statistics and trends.

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
(one or more datacenters) she selects. We refer to a “VM
deployment” as a set of VMs that the customer groups and
manages together. All VMs in a deployment execute in one
“cluster” in the chosen region, i.e. a large aggregation of
servers within which a deployment needs to fit. Each VM
belongs to a “role”, which refers to the type or functionality
performed by the VM (e.g., IaaS VM, PaaS Web server).
Dataset. Our dataset contains information about every VM
running on Azure from November 16, 2016 to February 16,
2017. The information includes (1) identification numbers
for the VM, and the deployment and subscription to which
it belongs; (2) the VM role name; (3) the VM size in terms of
its maximum core, memory, and disk allocations; and (4) the
minimum, average, and maximum VM resource utilizations
(reported every 5 minutes). A sanitized subset of these data
is available at https://github.com/Azure/AzurePublicDataset.
Focus. We focus on aspects of real cloud workloads that
have an impact on resource management. Thus, we next ex-
plore distributions of VM type (IaaS vs PaaS), virtual resource
(CPU) usage, VM size (CPU cores and memory space), maxi-
mum deployment size, VM lifetime, workload class (likely
interactive vs delay-insensitive), and VM inter-arrival times.
We present both full platform and per-subscription perspec-
tives. The subscription is a natural unit for us, as it is tied
to billing, naming, quotas, and access control. Thus, it typi-
cally represents users who (sometimes repeatedly) execute
logically related workloads (e.g., many load-balanced copies
of a Web server, or Web servers and databases for an ecom-
merce service), and users from the same organization (e.g.,
the ecommerce company). As such, the subscription embod-
ies commonalities that enable accurate predictions. At the
end of each subsection, we discuss the implications for cloud
resource management. To close the section, we explore cor-
relations between metrics.
3.1
VM type
Entire cloud platform perspective. The workload is al-
most exactly split between IaaS (52%) and PaaS (48%) in
terms of VM counts; first-party workloads have slightly more
IaaS VMs (53% vs 47%), whereas third-party workloads have
slightly more PaaS VMs (53% vs 47%). However, PaaS actually
dominates the resource consumption with roughly 61% of
the total core hours. Even more interestingly, third-party
IaaS VMs consume significantly more core hours than their
PaaS counterparts (85% vs 15%, respectively), whereas the
opposite is true of first-party workloads (23% vs 77%).
Per-subscription perspective. We find that VMs from the
same subscription are almost always of the same type; 96%
of the subscriptions create VMs of a single type.
Implications for resource management. Some PaaS VMs
reveal information that the cloud provider can use in resource
0
20
40
60
80
100
CPU Utilization (%)
0
25
50
75
100
CDF
Average
P95 Max
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
Figure 1: Average and P95 of max CPU utilizations.
management. For example, a PaaS Web server VM is likely
to be customer-facing, and may serve as the front-end to
an interactive service. The provider must ensure the best
possible performance for such services. In contrast, IaaS
VMs reveal no information and must be treated carefully. In
Section 3.6, we describe an approach to inferring the class of
VM workload that works well for both IaaS and PaaS.
3.2
Virtual resource usage
Entire cloud platform perspective. We illustrate the vir-
tual resource usage by quantifying CPU utilization per VM.
Figure 1 depicts the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
of the average virtual CPU utilizations for each VM, and the
CDF of the 95th-percentile of the maximum virtual CPU uti-
lizations (P95 Max). Recall that the utilization measurements
correspond to 5-minute intervals. For example, the figure
shows that 60% of the VMs (Y-axis) have an average CPU
utilization (X-axis) lower than 20%. Similarly, 40% of them
have a 95th-percentile utilization lower than 50%.
We draw two key observations from this figure. First, a
large percentage of VMs exhibit low average CPU utiliza-
tions, especially for first-party workloads. However, average
utilizations do not reflect the VMs’ full needs, so we must
consider the 95th percentiles. Though more than one third of
VMs exhibit low CPU utilizations even at the 95th percentile,
a large percentage of them exhibit very high utilizations (>
80%), especially for third-party workloads.
Second, the first-party distributions tend to show lower
average and 95th-percentile utilizations than the third-party
distributions. At least two factors contribute to this observa-
tion: (1) many first-party services require consistently low
latency, which can be easily achieved by overprovisioning
VMs; and (2) our dataset includes a non-trivial percentage
(15%) of first-party VMs used for testing the performance and
scalability of VM creation (i.e., VMs get created and quickly
killed without doing any actual work).

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of VMs
1
2
4
6
8
12
20
24
32
Figure 2: Number of virtual CPU cores per VM.
Per-subscription perspective. We find that VMs from the
same subscription tend to exhibit similar behaviors with re-
spect to utilization. Specifically, the coefficient of variation
(CoV = standard deviation divided by average) of the average
and 95th-percentile virtual CPU utilizations for each sub-
scription indicates low variance in these metrics for most
subscriptions. For example, 80% of subscriptions exhibit a
CoV of their average CPU utilizations that is smaller than 1.
Implications for resource management. Since at high
percentiles many VMs require nearly their entire resource
allocation, the provider must be careful when selecting phys-
ical servers for new VMs. Even when not oversubscribing
resources, the high resource usage may cause resource con-
tention. In this case, the provider has to resort to (expensive
and slow) live VM migration or accept potential workload
performance loss.
Nevertheless, a large percentage of VMs require many
fewer resources than their allocations. Thus, there is a sig-
nificant potential for oversubscribing physical resources, as
long as the provider can predict (at VM creation time) with
high confidence which VMs will require most of their alloca-
tions; these VMs can then be scheduled on different servers.
Focusing on individual subscriptions should simplify this
prediction task, as the space of high utilizations is more
consistent than across the entire population of VMs.
3.3
VM size
We now study the distribution of VM sizes. We define the
size of a VM as the amount of CPU and memory that the
VM’s owner requested for it.
Entire platform perspective. We illustrate the VM sizes
via the number of virtual CPU cores and amount of memory
per VM. Figures 2 and 3 present the corresponding break-
downs using stacked bars, one each for first-party, third-
party, and all workloads. The figures show that most VMs
require few virtual cores (almost 80% of VMs require 1-2
cores) and relatively little memory (70% of VMs require less
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of VMs
0.75
1.75
2
3.5
4
7
8
14
16
28
>=32
Figure 3: Amount of memory per VM in GBytes.
than 4 GBytes). This reflects a scale-out design pattern where
one prefers more numerous small VMs over fewer large VMs.
The figures also show that first- and third-party customers
create VMs of comparable sizes, except that the latter users
create a larger percentage of 3.5-GByte and 0.75-GByte VMs,
and a smaller percentage of 1.75-GByte VMs.
Per-subscription perspective. Subscriptions are remark-
ably consistent in terms of their VM sizes; nearly all sub-
scriptions show CoVs of cores and memory lower than 1.
Implications for resource management. As small VMs
dominate, it is easier to fill holes in the server packing and
reduce fragmentation. Despite this, packing is complex as it
must consider multiple resource dimensions and constraints.
3.4
Maximum deployment size
Users do not always deploy their VMs to each region (a
cluster in the region) in one shot, so each deployment may
grow (and shrink) over time before it is terminated.
Entire platform perspective. Thus, we now consider the
deployment sizes across the platform. While studying this
data, we realized that some users are not using the concept
of deployment in the way it was intended, i.e. to cleanly
group and manage logically related VMs within a subscrip-
tion. In fact, at least one large first-party service creates many
single-VM deployments, instead of extending an existing de-
ployment each time. To approximate the original intent, we
redefine a deployment as the set of VMs from each subscrip-
tion that are deployed to a region during a day. Assuming
this definition, the CDFs of maximum deployment sizes ap-
pear in Figure 4. The figure shows that most deployments
are small: roughly 40% of them include a single VM, and 80%
have at most 5 VMs. Moreover, the figure shows that third-
party users deploy VMs in smaller groups than first-party
ones. These observations reflect patterns that favor smaller
VM groups; when users deploy multiple groups, they prefer
them to be spread across multiple regions.

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
5
10
15
20
25
30
# VMs
0
25
50
75
100
CDF
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
Figure 4: Max number of VMs in each deployment.
Looking at deployment sizes in terms of cores or memory
shows the expected trends. We do not depict these data to
keep deployment and VM sizes separate until Section 3.8.
Per-subscription perspective. Again, subscriptions show
remarkably consistent behavior with respect to their max-
imum deployment sizes; nearly all subscriptions exhibit a
CoV for this metric less than 1.
Implications for resource management. The cluster must
have enough capacity to host the maximum size of a deploy-
ment, and avoid eventual deployment failures (or long com-
munication delays across VMs of the same deployment). The
dominance of small deployments suggests that the provider
need not reserve large amounts of capacity within each clus-
ter for deployment growth, as long as it can predict (when
deployments are first created) with high confidence the few
deployments that could become large. The per-subscription
data shows that focusing on individual subscriptions may
increase prediction accuracy.
3.5
VM lifetime
Entire platform perspective. Figure 5 presents the CDFs
of VM lifetimes (how long VMs last from creation to ter-
mination) in our dataset, including only VMs that started
and completed in our observation period. As this group rep-
resents 94% of the VMs in our dataset, we can confidently
make statements about VM lifetimes. (There are 2% of VMs
that started before and completed after the period, and 4% of
VMs that either started before or completed after the period.)
The figure shows that a large percentage of first-party
VMs tend to live shorter (less than 15 minutes) than their
third-party counterparts. The main reason is the first-party
VM-creation testing workloads we mention above. The figure
also shows a broad spectrum of lifetimes, but most lifetimes
are relatively short. The curves show a knee around 1 day
(more than 90% of lifetimes are shorter), and then almost
flatten out. This suggests that, if a VM runs for 1 day, it will
very likely run much longer. Perhaps most interestingly, the
50
100
150
200
Lifetime (hours)
0
25
50
75
100
CDF
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
Figure 5: VM lifetime.
relatively small percentage of long-running VMs actually
account for >95% of the total core hours (not shown).
Per-subscription perspective. Many subscriptions show
consistent lifetime behavior. For example, roughly 75% of
them exhibit lifetime CoVs lower than 1.
Implications for resource management. The health man-
agement system can schedule non-urgent server mainte-
nance without producing VM unavailability or requiring live
migration, if it can predict lifetimes accurately. In addition,
with accurate lifetime predictions at VM creation time, the
provider can schedule VMs that will complete at roughly
the same time on the same servers. The per-subscription
data shows that considering subscriptions individually may
increase lifetime prediction accuracy.
3.6
Workload class
In considering tightly packing VMs onto physical servers,
the provider might consider the VMs’ resilience to resource
contention and interference; highly interactive, customer-
facing workloads require low tail response times (measured
in milliseconds), so they are typically less resilient than batch
or background (delay-insensitive) workloads. However, this
resilience is difficult to ascertain, because the provider has
little or no information about what is running on the VMs,
especially in third-party IaaS scenarios. Even if the provider
were to request this information in advance, users may be
unwilling or unable to provide it.
For these reasons, we perform an analysis of the (average)
CPU utilization time series to infer whether a VM’s work-
load is likely to be interactive. Since interactive workloads
tend to exhibit diurnal cycles (people are active during the
day and sleep at night), our analysis attempts to find peri-
odicity in the utilization time series over 3 days, using the
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm. The FFT is ideal
because it can detect periodicity at multiple time scales. Our
algorithm categorizes VMs into two classes: potentially in-
teractive (those that exhibit periodic behavior at the diurnal

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of core hours
Interactive
Delay-insensitive
Unknown
Figure 6: Workload classes and their use of core hours.
scale) and delay-insensitive (e.g., batch workloads, develop-
ment and test workloads). Obviously, it is conceivable that
some background VMs could increase/decrease activity at
periodic intervals and appear periodic. We do not isolate
these cases, because our classification seeks to be conserva-
tive (i.e., it is fine to classify a delay-insensitive workload as
interactive, but not vice-versa). Moreover, some critical daily
batch jobs have strict deadlines, so classifying them as in-
teractive correctly reflects their performance needs. Finally,
note that the algorithm works well even when the dominant
resource is not the CPU, because the CPU is a good proxy
for periodicity (e.g., network-bound interactive workloads
exhibit more CPU activity during the day than at night).
Our periodicity analysis targets the VMs that run long
enough for us to detect a reliable pattern (at least 3 days).
We could have used other heuristics to classify VMs that
live shorter. However, since VMs running longer than 3 days
consume 94% of the core hours, our classification already
covers the vast majority of the used resources.
We have validated our classification algorithm with cus-
tomers accounting for more than 50% of the first-party VMs.
Entire platform perspective. Figure 6 depicts the percent-
age of total (left), first-party (middle), and third-party (right)
core hours in each class. The “Unknown” class represents the
VMs that do not last 3 consecutive days. The figure shows
that delay-insensitive VMs consume most (roughly 68%) of
the core hours, regardless of whether they are first-party or
not. Still, a significant percentage of VMs execute potentially
interactive workloads and consume roughly 28% of the core
hours; these VMs must be managed carefully.
Per-subscription perspective. Inspecting the classifica-
tion per subscription again shows that most subscriptions
behave consistently; 76% of subscriptions with long-running
VMs (at least one VM runs for 3 days) create VMs dominated
by a single (usually delay-insensitive) class.
Implications for resource management. Our classifica-
tion enables the provider to apportion resources according to
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
VM arrivals per hour
Total
1st Party + Services
3rd Party
Figure 7: Time series of arrivals per hour at one region.
performance constraints. For example, upon a power emer-
gency, the power capping system [26] can assign full power
to VMs running interactive workloads and a reduced bud-
get to delay-insensitive VMs. The VM scheduler can tightly
pack VMs that run delay-insensitive workloads onto physical
servers, while loosely packing VMs that run interactive ones.
Similarly, the provider can use the former classes of VMs to
oversubscribe physical servers, while avoiding oversubscrip-
tion of servers that run an interactive VM. In all scenarios,
the provider must be able to predict with high confidence
which VMs will run or are running delay-insensitive work-
loads. Even if such high confidence cannot be achieved, the
provider may leverage our classification to help users select
good VM and deployment sizes based on their workloads’
characteristics (e.g., tighter sizes for delay-insensitive work-
loads). Focusing on subscriptions should increase prediction
accuracy, as they behave consistently over time.
3.7
VM inter-arrival times
We now study the VM inter-arrival times at one of Azure’s
regions. Figure 7 depicts the arrival time series at hourly gran-
ularity over a random week. We can see that that arrivals
are very bursty and diurnal with lower load on weekends,
regardless of the type of workload. This pattern is represen-
tative of other regions as well. The burstiness is due to the
small percentage of large deployments. We verified that the
arrival times are heavy-tailed by fitting Weibull distributions
(nearly perfectly) to them.
Implications for resource management. Diurnal arrivals
suggest that the provider can schedule its internal batch com-
puting or infrastructure testing workloads for the night with-
out risking competition with customer workloads. Heavy-
tailed arrivals suggest that burstiness can be significant, so
the VM scheduler must be optimized for high throughput.
3.8
Correlations between metrics
Finally, we correlate the VM metrics we study using Spear-
man’s method. Figure 8 shows the pair-wise correlations for

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
Lifetime
Cores
Memory
 CPU Average
CPU P95 Max
Deployment
 Size
Workload
Workload
Deployment
 Size
CPU P95 Max
 CPU Average
Memory
Cores
Lifetime
0.21
0.047
0.048 -0.018 -0.03 -0.066
1
-0.13
-0.21
-0.15 -0.029 0.059
1
-0.066
0.2
-0.036 -0.068
0.8
1
0.059
-0.03
0.11
-0.16
-0.18
1
0.8
-0.029 -0.018
0.083
0.9
1
-0.18 -0.068 -0.15
0.048
0.1
1
0.9
-0.16 -0.036 -0.21
0.047
1
0.1
0.083
0.11
0.2
-0.13
0.21
Non-Linear Correlation
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure 8: Spearman’s correlations between metrics.
the entire platform as a heat map; we include the workload
class by numbering the classes 1 (delay-insensitive) and 2
(interactive). A correlation factor near 1.0 reflects a positive
relationship (a higher value of one metric means a higher
value for the other), a factor near −1.0 reflects a negative re-
lationship, whereas a factor near 0.0 reflects no relationship.
Obviously, each metric is strongly positively correlated
with itself. In addition, the two utilization metrics are strongly
positively correlated, and so are numbers of cores and amount
of memory (the latter relationship derives from Azure’s VM
offerings). More interestingly, we see that the utilizations (es-
pecially 95th-percentile) show a lightly positive relationship
to lifetime and a slightly negative relationship to cores and
memory per VM, meaning that VMs with higher utilization
tend to be smaller and live longer. In contrast, lifetime has
no relationship with number of cores or amount of memory
per VM, whereas deployment size has a slightly negative
relationship with these metrics (larger deployments require
fewer resources per VM). Finally, the class shows a lightly
positive relationship to lifetime, meaning that interactive
VMs tend to live longer. The other metrics show no relation-
ship to workload class.
The correlations are different when considering only third-
party or only first-party workloads. Most strikingly, the uti-
lization metrics are moderately positively correlated with
deployment size in third-party workloads, whereas they are
lightly negatively correlated in first-party ones.
4
RESOURCE CENTRAL
The previous section discussed several VM behaviors and
metrics related to resource management, and the potential
benefits of predicting them accurately.
To produce these predictions, we introduce Resource Cen-
tral (RC), a system for ingesting VM telemetry, learning from
past VM behaviors, producing models that can predict these
behaviors, and executing the models (i.e., providing predic-
tions) when client systems request them. Though we focus
on predicting VM behaviors in this paper, RC is general and
can be used for learning/predicting server effects as well,
such as hardware failures. RC is in production, supporting
engineers and data scientists. The systems that will use it
are being productized and qualified within Azure.
Next, we discuss some RC use-cases and its design.
4.1
Example RC use-cases
We envision many uses for RC predictions of the metrics
from Section 3. The following is a non-exhaustive list that
expands on some examples from Section 3:
• Smart VM scheduling. Before selecting servers to run
a set of new VMs, the VM scheduler can contact RC for
predictions of the VMs’ expected resource utilizations. With
this information, the scheduler can select servers to balance
the disk IOPS load, or to reduce the likelihood of physical
resource exhaustion in oversubscribed servers.
• Smart cluster selection. Before selecting a cluster in
which to create a VM deployment, the cluster selection sys-
tem can query RC for a prediction of maximum deployment
size. With this information, this system can select a cluster
that will likely have enough resources.
• Smart power oversubscription and capping. During
a power emergency (when the power draw is about to ex-
ceed a circuit breaker limit), the power capping system can
query RC for predictions of VM workload interactivity, be-
fore apportioning the available power budget across servers.
Ideally, VMs executing interactive workloads should receive
all the power they may want, in detriment of VMs running
batch and background tasks. Alternatively, the VM sched-
uler can request interactivity predictions before selecting
servers, so that interactive and delay-insensitive workloads
are segregated in different sets of servers.
• Scheduling server maintenance. When a server starts
to misbehave, the health monitoring system can query RC
for the expected lifetime of the VMs running on the server. It
can thus determine when maintenance can be scheduled, and
whether VMs need to be live-migrated to enable maintenance
without unavailability. In addition, the VM scheduler can
use the lifetime predictions to co-locate VMs that are likely
to terminate roughly at the same time. This could facilitate
other types of maintenance, such as OS updates.
• Recommending VM and deployment sizes. The cloud
platform could provide a service to its customers that recom-
mends the appropriate VM size and number of VMs at the
time of each deployment. Using RC predictions of workload
class and resource utilization, the service could recommend
deployments where VMs predicted to be delay-insensitive
would be more tightly sized than interactive VMs. (Existing
rightsizing services from Azure, AWS, and GCP recommend
new sizes for currently running VMs after long observation
periods and do not account for the likely workload class.)

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
Offline
Massive-scale cluster
Extraction
Cleanup
Aggregation
Training
Cross-Validation
Model generation
Feature data 
generation
Orchestrator
Trigger workflow
Download and 
sanity check
Publish to
data store
Highly available 
data store
Persistent cache
Fetch models & 
feature data
Generate 
predictions 
Client
Models & feature 
data caches
Results 
cache
Figure 9: RC architecture (pull version).
Exploring all these use-cases is beyond the scope of this
paper. As an example, Section 5 details the use of RC predic-
tions for smart VM scheduling with server oversubscription.
4.2
Design and implementation
Principles. Our design for RC follows a few principles:
(1) For performance and availability, RC should be an
independent and general system that is off the critical
performance and availability paths of the systems that
use it.
(2) For maintainability, it should be simple and rely on
any existing well-supported infrastructures.
(3) For usability, it should require minimal modifications
to the systems that use it, and provide an interface that
is general enough for many use-cases.
Overview. Based on these principles, we designed RC as in
Figure 9. As the figure illustrates, RC has offline and online
components. The offline workflow consists of several tasks:
data extraction, cleanup, aggregation, feature data genera-
tion, training, validation, and machine learning (ML) model
generation. RC performs these phases on a centralized mas-
sive data processing cluster that collects all the VM telemetry
from the cloud fabric. RC orchestrates these phases, sanity-
checks the models and feature data, and publishes them (with
version numbers) to an existing highly available store. The
store is present in each datacenter.
In our current design, RC does not automatically select
the appropriate ML modeling approach (e.g., regression tree,
random forest) for each metric, leaving this task for data
analysts who also (a) provide a “specification” describing the
inputs to each model and (b) record them in the store.
The online part of RC uses a single, general, and thread-
safe client dynamically linked library (DLL), within which
the ML models execute to produce predictions. This DLL
is the only view of RC for all external clients. The client
(e.g., VM scheduler, health monitoring system) calls the DLL
passing as input the model name and information about
the VM(s) for which it wants predictions. We refer to this
information as the client inputs to the models. Examples
of client inputs are subscription id, VM type and size, and
deployment size. Besides the client inputs, the model may
require historical feature data as additional inputs, which
RC fetches from the highly available store. For example, the
subscription id for a new VM deployment may be one of
the client inputs provided by the VM scheduler to a lifetime
model. As an example of feature data, the lifetime model
would also require information on historical lifetimes (e.g.,
percentage of short-lived and long-lived VMs to date) for the
same subscription from the store.
ML modeling approaches. RC is agnostic to the specific
modeling approach data analysts select; many approaches
fit the framework. In our current implementation, analysts
can select models from a large ML repository that runs on
the data processing cluster. The repository also provides a
library for executing the models at the clients.
The leftmost three columns of Table 1 list the modeling
approaches we currently use for the metrics of Section 3:
Random Forests and Extreme Gradient Boosting Trees as
classifiers, and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to detect peri-
odicity in the utilization timeseries. Each model takes many
features as inputs, deriving from a smaller number of at-
tributes (e.g., VM type, VM size, guest operating system).
Due to the predictive value of these features, RC can make
predictions about VMs it has not seen before.
For classifying numeric metrics, we divide the space of
possible predictions into a small number of buckets. Formu-
lating these models as classifiers with buckets rather than
regression algorithms, makes the metrics easier to predict.
For example, it is easier to predict that utilization will be in
the 50% to 75% bucket than predict that it will be exactly 53%.
When the prediction must be converted to a number, the
client can assume the highest value for the predicted bucket,
the middle value, or the lowest value.
Client DLL. It is configurable per client. Given a model
name, it finds out how to interpret the client inputs from the
specifications for the model. It caches the prediction results,
model, and feature data from the store in memory.
Table 2 lists the main DLL API methods. On a prediction
request (a call to the Predict method), the DLL looks up the
results cache first by hashing the model name and client
inputs. On a hit, it returns the cached result. On a miss, the
DLL looks up the other caches, and executes the model using
client inputs and feature data inputs. The DLL caches the
result of this execution. Each prediction result is typically a
predicted value and a score. The score reflects the model’s
confidence on the predicted value. The client may choose to
ignore a prediction when the confidence score is too low.

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
Metrics
Approach
#features
Model size
Feature data size
Avg CPU utilization
Random Forest
127
312 KB
376 MB
P95 max CPU utilization
Random Forest
127
311 KB
376 MB
Deployment size in #VMs
Extreme Gradient Boosting Tree
24
305 KB
368 MB
Deployment size in #cores
Extreme Gradient Boosting Tree
24
305 KB
368 MB
Lifetime
Extreme Gradient Boosting Tree
127
329 KB
376 MB
Workload class
FFT, Extreme Gradient Boosting Tree
34
152 KB
311 MB
Table 1: Metrics, ML modeling approaches, model and full feature dataset sizes.
API method
Parameters
Return
Description
initialize
none
boolean
Initializes client DLL
get_available_models
none
char*
Gets list of available models
predict_single
model_name,
struct
Produces one prediction
client_inputs*
prediction
predict_many
model_name,
struct
Produces multiple predictions
client_inputs**
prediction*
force_reload_cache
none
void
Refreshes memory & disk caches
flush_cache
none
void
Flushes memory & disk caches
Table 2: Main DLL API methods.
When the DLL cannot produce a prediction, it simply
returns a no-prediction flag to the client system, which must
be able to handle this situation.
Cache management. Result caching is configurable and
implements a hash table accessible by hashing the model
name and the client inputs. Thus, it works well when the
client does not provide any rapidly changing inputs in the
prediction calls. Each result cache entry stores only the cor-
responding prediction value and score.
The DLL caches model and feature data using either a
pull (fetch from the store on-demand) or push (update cache
when a change occurs at the store) approach. In one pull
configuration, the DLL returns a no-prediction on any re-
sult cache miss; accesses to the remote store and/or model
executions happen in the background. Clients can use this
configuration when the models or full feature dataset are too
large for their memory, and they never want remote accesses
or model executions on the critical path of predictions.
We have not needed pull-based caching however: as the
two rightmost columns of Table 1 show, all the model sizes
and feature datasets we have considered so far are small
enough to fit entirely in the client’s memory. Thus, we rely
on push-based caching, where RC periodically produces new
models and feature data for all subscriptions, and pushes
them in the background to the caches in the client DLL. In the
push approach, RC returns a no-prediction if it cannot find
a model or feature data in its caches. For example, this may
occur if the prediction request refers to a recently created
subscription; information about this subscription will appear
in the feature data cache after a future data push.
Regardless of the configured caching approach, RC also
stores the content of the model and feature data caches in
the local file system. It only looks up the local disk cache
in either of two cases: (1) there is an in-memory model or
feature data cache miss and the store is unavailable; or (2)
the client crashes and restarts and the store is unavailable.
In both cases, the DLL ignores the local disk cache, if it has
expired (the expiration time is also configurable).
Justification. Our DLL-based design follows the principles
listed above. First, our caches attain high hit rates and our
models are light enough to be instantiated/run at the client
(principle #1). Though high prediction performance is not
required for some RC use-cases, it can be critical when mod-
els are large or expensive to execute, or when the client
has a low time budget. Implementing RC as a service with
a REST API would have placed the interconnect and the
prediction-serving stack on the critical paths of all predic-
tions. Second, the DLL is simple and is backed by an existing
highly available store, so it does not require provisioning
additional servers/VMs for serving predictions (principle #2).
Finally, the interface the DLL provides makes requesting
predictions seem like a simple method call (principle #3).
5
CASE STUDY: RC-INFORMED VM
SCHEDULING
In this section, we describe how Azure’s production VM
scheduler can leverage the predictions from RC to enable
careful physical CPU oversubscription. Other VM schedulers
can use the same predictions in a similar way. Recall that a
complete description of the Azure scheduler is beyond the
scope of this paper. Instead, we overview the system and

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
describe the changes we propose to it. We are productizing
our changes and expect to deploy them to production in the
next few months. In production, we will only oversubscribe
servers running first-party workloads.
VM scheduler. Azure executes one VM scheduler per server
cluster. The scheduler selects physical servers on which to
place each VM assigned to its cluster. This decision is com-
plex, because it must consider multiple resource dimensions,
as well as several constraints on the VM placements, at the
same time. For example, given a deployment defined by the
VMs’ maximum CPU, memory, and disk space requirements,
the scheduler must find servers with enough resources, while
spreading the VMs across multiple failure and update do-
mains. The system must also reserve resources for deploy-
ment growth and healing (re-starting) VMs affected by hard-
ware failures. Ultimately, the scheduler must maximize the
number of VMs that can be accepted, while minimizing the
number of VM scheduling failures.
Clearly, scheduling VMs fast and at scale under these con-
ditions is challenging. In fact, computing an optimal solution
for such a bin-packing problem is infeasible, so prior works
have used heuristics [2, 3, 24]. In a similar vein, our scheduler
sequentially applies a set of rules that progressively narrow
the choice of servers that are candidates for a placement.
Some rules represent hard constraints that cannot be vio-
lated (e.g., must have enough available resources), whereas
others can be violated if they would excessively restrict the
set of candidate servers (e.g., prefer servers that will be more
tightly packed). Despite its heuristic nature, our multi-year
experience with the scheduler shows that it can pack the
VMs’ requested resources tightly, producing little fragmen-
tation and few scheduling failures.
Leveraging RC predictions for oversubscription. Our
proposed changes seek to increase server utilization via CPU
oversubscription, while preventing scenarios where servers
would actually run out of physical CPUs.
Our new code appears in Algorithm 1, which includes a
hard rule (SELECTCANDIDATESERVERS) and two book-
keeping functions (PLACEVM and VMCOMPLETED). The
rule determines the servers where the new VM would “fit”;
it passes those eligible servers to the next rule in the chain.
Though our rule must check that the VM fits with respect
to all resources, for clarity, the algorithm only shows the
handling of the CPU resource (other resources are not over-
subscribed). Similarly, we elide the single lock that protects
the VM and server data structures in the three routines.
Our rule receives the existing production vs non-producti-
on annotation associated with first-party subscriptions as an
input (called VM type in Algorithm 1). We only oversubscribe
physical CPUs using non-production VMs. In fact, our code
logically splits the servers into two groups: (1) oversubscrib-
able, i.e. those that only host non-production workloads; and
Algorithm 1 CPU oversubscription rule and bookkeeping.
1: Given: VM V to schedule, current set of candidate servers C
2: Client inputs include V .subscription, V .type, V .alloc
3: function SelectCandidateServers(V , C)
4:
if V .type == PROD then
5:
for each non-oversubscribable or empty server c ∈C do
6:
if c.alloc+V .alloc <= SERVER_CAPACITY then
7:
Mark c eligible
8:
else
9:
Pred = predict_single(VM_P95UTIL, client_inputs_list)
10:
if Pred.score >= .6 then
11:
V .util = Highest_Util_in_Bucket[Pred.value] * V .alloc
12:
else
13:
V .util = V .alloc
14:
for each oversubscribable or empty server c ∈C do
15:
if c.alloc+V .alloc <= MAX_OVERSUB and
16:
c.util+V .util <= MAX_UTIL then
17:
Mark c eligible
18:
return List of eligible servers
19: function PlaceVM(V , c)
20:
if c is empty then
◃i.e., if c.alloc == 0 then
21:
if V .type == PROD then
22:
Tag c as non-oversubscribable
23:
else
24:
Tag c as oversubscribable
25:
c.alloc += V .alloc
26:
if c is oversubscribable then
27:
c.util += V .util
28: function VMCompleted(V , c)
29:
c.alloc -= V .alloc
30:
if c is oversubscribable then
31:
c.util -= V .util
(2) non-oversubscribable, i.e. those that only host production
workloads. A later rule tries to fill up non-oversubscribable
servers before it places VMs in empty servers. For oversub-
scribable servers, the rule avoids oversubscribing a server
if another server can accommodate the new VM without
oversubscribing resources.
Our rule uses RC predictions of 95th-percentile virtual
core utilization (line 9). If RC’s confidence in this prediction
is low, we conservatively assume that the VM will consume
all its allocated cores (lines 10-13). The rule then marks as
candidates any oversubscribable servers for which: the sum
of the VMs’ allocations is less than MAX_OVERSUB, and the
sum of the VMs’ predicted 95th-percentile utilizations is less
than MAX_UTIL (lines 15-17). MAX_OVERSUB is the maxi-
mum allowed CPU oversubscription (e.g., 15% more virtual
cores than physical cores), and MAX_UTIL is the maximum
allowed physical CPU utilization. We can set MAX_UTIL
to 100% (or another high value that provides some slack) to
prevent resource exhaustion.
Implementation as a soft rule. Implementing the utiliza-
tion check as part of the (hard) “fit” rule as above gives more
importance to preventing resource exhaustion than reducing
scheduling failures. An approach that inverts this tradeoff

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
implements the utilization check as a soft rule after the fit
rule. In this version, the scheduler treats limiting the CPU
utilization as best effort, i.e. if enforcing the soft rule would
cause all servers that have the needed resources to be marked
ineligible, the rule is simply disregarded.
Mispredictions and lack of predictions. A prediction er-
ror for a VM is unlikely to cause problems, unless RC under-
predicts these values for many co-located VMs. Consistent
under-predictions would cause the target peak utilization
to be exceeded frequently. Utilization mispredictions would
be more prone to problems if we decided to limit the com-
bined predicted average utilizations, instead of the combined
predicted 95th-percentile utilizations. In case RC does not
produce a prediction (not shown), it is safest to assume that
the VM will exhibit 100% utilization.
Justification. As we seek to balance packing tightness and
the ability to eliminate resource exhaustion in oversubscribed
servers, our approach uses 95th-percentile instead of maxi-
mum utilization predictions. Thus, resource exhaustion might
occur when higher percentile utilizations for multiple non-
production VMs happen to align in time, even when pre-
dictions are perfectly accurate. Our results show that these
events happen very rarely, so we can limit resource exhaus-
tion while achieving tight packing.
Finally, we do not consider network and disk bandwidth
in VM scheduling, because Azure’s interconnect is overpro-
visioned and persistent storage is remote to compute servers.
6
EVALUATION
We now evaluate the quality of RC’s predictions, its perfor-
mance, and the benefits of RC-informed VM scheduling.
6.1
RC prediction quality and performance
Prediction quality. As we suggest in Section 3, the cus-
tomers’ subscriptions are often a good unit upon which to
base predictions, as VMs from the same subscription tend to
exhibit similar behaviors. For this reason, we produce models
using features that exist in all subscriptions, but produce pre-
dictions using feature data from the input VMs’ subscription.
This approach nicely matches the uses of RC for resource
management, as we always know the subscription to which
the VMs we want to predict belong.
To evaluate RC’s prediction quality, we train our models
with two months of data and test them on the third month of
our dataset (Section 3). To improve quality, we experimented
with multiple techniques, including feature engineering and
normalization, feature selection and regularization.
We divide the space of possible predictions for each metric
into the buckets listed in Table 3. Given these buckets, Ta-
ble 4 summarizes our prediction results for every metric and
Metric
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
Bucket 3
Bucket 4
Avg and P95 util
0-25%
25-50%
50-75%
75-100%
Deployment size
1
>1 & ≤10
>10 & ≤100
>100
(#VMs and #cores)
Lifetime
≤15 mins
>15 & ≤60 mins
>1 & ≤24 hs
>24 hs
Workload class
Delay-
Interactive
NA
NA
insensitive
Table 3: Metrics and their bucket sizes.
bucket. The leftmost column lists the metric we are predict-
ing. The second column lists the accuracy of the full set of
predictions (i.e., the percentage of predictions that were cor-
rect), assuming the predicted bucket is that with the highest
confidence score. The next set of columns present the results
per bucket: they list the percentage of VMs that truly fall
in the bucket, the predictions’ precision for the bucket (i.e.,
the percentage of true positives in the set of predictions that
named this bucket), and the predictions’ recall (i.e., the per-
centage of true positives in the set of predictions that should
have named this bucket). The final two columns list the pre-
cision and recall, respectively, assuming that RC replies with
a no-prediction if the highest bucket score is lower than 0.6
(i.e., confidence is low).
Table 4 demonstrates RC’s high prediction accuracy, which
ranges between 79% (lifetime) and 90% (workload class) de-
pending on the metric. The prediction quality is even higher
when we discard predictions with low confidence: preci-
sion ranges between 85% (lifetime) and 94% (95th-percentile
CPU utilization) without substantially hurting recall, which
ranges between 73% (95th-percentile CPU utilization) and
98% (workload class). For all metrics, the most important
attributes in determining prediction accuracy are the per-
centage of VMs classified into each bucket to date in the
subscription. Other relevant attributes are the service name
(i.e., the name of a top first-party subscription or “unknown”
for the others), deployment time, operating system, and VM
size; their relative importance depends on the metric. VM
roles have little predictive value, e.g. all IaaS VMs have role
“IaaS” but may behave quite differently.
RC tends to achieve higher precision and recall for the
more popular buckets. This is expected since it has more
data to learn from in these cases. An interesting case is
workload class: bucket 1 shows that 99% of the VMs run
delay-insensitive workloads, and RC achieves 100% precision
(every delay-insensitive prediction is for a delay-insensitive
VM) and 90% recall (90% of the delay-insensitive VMs are
predicted as such). Bucket 2 shows that RC achieves 7% pre-
cision and 84% recall for the relatively few interactive VMs.
This low precision reflects our desire to maximize the recall
for this class, and means that many interactive predictions
are for delay-insensitive VMs; mistakes in this direction are
acceptable whereas those in the reverse direction (predicting
interactive VMs as delay-insensitive) are undesirable.

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
Bucket 3
Bucket 4
Metric
Acc.
%
P
R
%
P
R
%
P
R
%
P
R
Pθ
Rθ
Avg CPU utilization
0.81
74%
0.92
0.83
19%
0.73
0.78
6%
0.78
0.74
2%
0.74
0.71
0.87
0.78
P95 CPU utilization
0.83
25%
0.83
0.89
15%
0.72
0.74
14%
0.73
0.72
46%
0.91
0.86
0.94
0.73
Deploy size (#VMs)
0.83
49%
0.85
0.87
40%
0.79
0.79
10%
0.80
0.74
1%
0.87
0.75
0.88
0.90
Deploy size (#cores)
0.86
19%
0.81
0.84
60%
0.88
0.90
19%
0.81
0.76
3%
0.86
0.66
0.90
0.92
Lifetime
0.79
29%
0.78
0.81
32%
0.70
0.79
32%
0.71
0.77
7%
0.69
0.80
0.85
0.80
Workload class
0.90
99%
1.00
0.90
1%
0.07
0.84
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
0.91
0.98
Table 4: RC’s prediction quality. Acc = accuracy; P = precision; R = recall.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Microseconds
0
25
50
75
100
CDF
Avg CPU
P95 CPU
Deploy size (#VMs)
Deploy size (#cores)
Lifetime
Workload class
Figure 10: Latency of model execution for our metrics.
Performance. The key drivers of RC’s online performance
are the client DLL caches, model execution, and the data
store, so our experiments assess: (1) the hit rate and latency
of result cache accesses; (2) the latency of model execution
on the client; and (3) the latency of model and feature data
cache misses when using pull-based caching. For these exper-
iments, we create a dummy client that repeatedly requests
predictions for the VMs in our month-long test set. The client
and DLL run on a 2-core VM.
We find that the RC result cache achieves a high hit rate for
our dataset. On average, an entry is accessed between 18 and
68 times, depending on the metric, after the corresponding
model execution. Since the result cache is very small (at
most around 25 MB) for our dataset and could be allowed
to grow significantly, a longer VM trace would produce an
even higher average number of hits per model execution.
The 99th-percentile latency of a hit is only 1.3 µs, essentially
corresponding to preparing a key and accessing a hash table.
Figure 10 shows that latencies are low (and predictable)
even when RC executes models on-the-fly due to result cache
misses. Median latencies range from 95 to 147 µs, whereas
99th-percentile latencies range from 139 to 258 µs.
Finally, we find that accesses to the data store when using
pull-based caching take substantially longer. Specifically, the
store we use has median and 99th-percentile latencies of 2.9
and 5.6 ms, respectively, for an 850-byte record (the size of
the feature data for each subscription).
6.2
Case study: RC-informed VM
scheduling
We now evaluate the impact of using 95th-percentile CPU
utilization predictions in server CPU oversubscription. Our
goal is not to fully evaluate the Azure VM scheduler. Rather,
we assess the potential benefits of RC’s resource utilization
predictions, using the Azure scheduler as an example.
Methodology. As our changes to the VM scheduler are not
yet in production, we rely on simulations of it using real
VM traces. The simulator is faithful to the real scheduler. In
fact, Azure evaluates all changes to the production scheduler
using the simulator. We have extended the simulator to (1)
associate real first-party utilization traces (from the dataset
of Section 3) with the VMs being scheduled, (2) implement
our changes to the scheduler, (3) consume RC predictions
for the real VMs, and (4) aggregate CPU utilization data
for all simulated servers. We aggregate utilization data in
the simulator by adding up the co-located VMs’ maximum
utilizations in each 5-minute period. This is pessimistic as
it assumes that the maximum utilizations last for the entire
period. Given this approach, simulated server utilizations may
actually exceed 100%. We assume that each VM’s virtual core
is pinned to a physical core, so exceeding 100% utilization in
a period means that more than one virtual core would have
shared a physical core (via timeslicing) for part of the period.
The simulator reports the server CPU utilizations over
time, and the number of scheduling “failures” (VMs that
could not be scheduled due to lack of resources or fragmen-
tation). Using these metrics, we compare schedules without
oversubscription or differentiation between production and
non-production VMs (Baseline), with RC-informed oversub-
scription as a soft rule (RC-informed-soft), with RC-informed
oversubscription as a hard rule (RC-informed-hard), and with
oversubscription but without RC’s predictions (Naive). We
also compare against schedules in which RC always predicts
the correct bucket (RC-soft-right) or always predicts an incor-
rect random bucket (RC-soft-wrong) for the 95th-percentile
CPU utilization. By default, we set MAX_OVERSUB and
MAX_UTIL in Algorithm 1 to 125% and 100% of the servers’
CPU capacity, respectively, but we also study the sensitivity
of the RC results to these parameters. Finally, we simulate

SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, R. Bianchini
336k VM arrivals to a cluster of 880 servers (each with 16
cores and 112 GBytes of RAM) over a period of 1 month. The
VMs exhibit the same size and lifetime distributions as in
Section 3, and their original tags (71% production VMs).
Comparing schedulers. Given our default settings, RC-
informed-soft produces no scheduling failures and only 77
individual server utilization readings above 100% over the
entire month and across all servers. RC-informed-hard pro-
duces the same results, as VM utilizations are not high enough
to cause deployment failures (our utilization analysis below
describes cases in which RC-informed-soft and RC-informed-
hard behave differently). Naive does not perform as well: it
also produces no failures, but shows 6× more server uti-
lizations higher than 100%. In contrast, the Baseline system
produces no server utilizations higher than 100% (since there
is no oversubscription) and 0.25% of failures. This percentage
of failures is 2.5× higher than what we consider acceptable.
These results show that RC-informed oversubscription pro-
duces more capacity from the same hardware, while control-
ling resource exhaustion for non-production workloads.
We also find that predicting utilization accurately is impor-
tant. RC-soft-right produces similar behavior to RC-informed-
soft, with some more utilization readings higher than 100%.
This is not surprising since (1) RC-informed-soft already
has high prediction accuracy (Table 4), and (2) RC-soft-right
assumes perfect predictions of 95th-percentile utilization,
whereas the simulator aggregates maximum utilizations. In
contrast, RC-soft-wrong does much worse, producing 3×
more above-100% utilization readings than RC-informed-soft
(while still producing no scheduling failures).
Sensitivity to amount of oversubscription (MAX_OVERSUB).
We now compare RC-informed-soft for allowable oversub-
scriptions of 125% (results above), 120%, and 115% of the
servers’ CPU capacity. Lowering this value progressively
increases the number of scheduling failures, as there is less
available capacity for non-production workloads. Even at
115% oversubscription however, the number of failures in
RC-informed is still 65% lower than in Baseline. At the same
time, each server receives fewer VMs as oversubscription
decreases, so the likelihood of multiple concurrent utiliza-
tion spikes decreases. This leads to even lower numbers of
utilization readings above 100%: at 115% allowable oversub-
scription, RC-informed-soft produces only 22 such readings.
Sensitivity to target max server utilization (MAX_UTIL).
Now, we investigate the impact of lowering the target maxi-
mum server utilization from 100% (results above) to 90% or
80%, while keeping the amount of allowable oversubscription
at 125%. Reducing the target effectively reduces the avail-
able server capacity for non-production workloads, leading
to a significant increase in scheduling failures for the same
VM arrivals. For example, for a target of 80%, the number of
scheduling failures increases to 903 or 0.27%, i.e. well beyond
the acceptable 0.1% failures. Nevertheless, lower target maxi-
mum utilizations can be used in more lightly loaded systems.
For instance, with 20% less load, an 80% target maximum
utilization leads to no failures.
Sensitivity to VM resource utilization. Finally, we study
the impact of higher virtual core utilization by artificially
adding 25% to all real utilization values, and adding 1 to all
utilization bucket predictions. As expected, higher utiliza-
tion causes RC-informed-hard to produce more scheduling
failures than RC-informed-soft. However, the difference is
just 4 failures, since our utilization predictions must be above
100% for all servers with enough available resources for the
hard rule to cause an extra failure.
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we detailed Azure’s VM workload, and dis-
cussed how the workload’s characteristics can be exploited
in improving resource management. We then introduced
Resource Central, a system for generating, storing, and ef-
ficiently using predictions of these characteristics. Finally,
we described changes to Azure’s production VM scheduler
that leverage such predictions. Our results show that Re-
source Central performs well, produces accurate predictions,
and enables safe CPU oversubscription. We conclude that
providers can exploit the characteristics of their workloads
in many management tasks, using machine learning and
efficient prediction-serving systems.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our shepherd, Mike Dahlin, and
the anonymous reviewers for their extensive comments on
our work. Christina Delimitrou, Inigo Goiri, Alok Kumbhare,
Knut Risvik, and Yunqi Zhang also provided many comments
that helped us improve our paper. Finally, we thank Bertus
Greeff and Abhisek Pan for their help with the VM scheduler
and its simulator.
REFERENCES
[1] Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin,
M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., Kudlur, M., Levenberg, J.,
Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray, D. G., Steiner, B., Tucker, P., Vasude-
van, V., Warden, P., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., and Zheng, X. TensorFlow: A
System for Large-Scale Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 12th
USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation
(2016).
[2] Beloglazov, A., and Buyya, R. Energy Efficient Resource Manage-
ment in Virtualized Cloud Data Centers. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (2010).
[3] Bobroff, N., Kochut, A., and Beaty, K. Dynamic Placement of
Virtual Machines for Managing SLA Violations. In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management (2007).

Resource Central: Understanding and Predicting Cloud Workloads
SOSP’17, October 28, 2017, Shanghai, China
[4] Calheiros, R. N., Masoumi, E., Ranjan, R., and Buyya, R. Workload
Prediction Using ARIMA Model and its Impact on Cloud Applications’
QoS. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing 3, 4 (2015).
[5] Crankshaw, D., Bailis, P., Gonzalez, J. E., Li, H., Zhang, Z.,
Franklin, M. J., Ghodsi, A., and Jordan, M. I. The Missing Piece in
Complex Analytics: Low Latency, Scalable Model Management and
Serving with Velox. In Proceedings of the 7th Biennial Conference on
Innovative Data Systems Research (2015).
[6] Crankshaw, D., Wang, X., Zhou, G., Franklin, M. J., Gonzalez, J. E.,
and Stoica, I. Clipper: A Low-Latency Online Prediction Serving
System. In Proceedings of the 14th Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (2017).
[7] Delimitrou, C., and Kozyrakis, C. Quasar: Resource-Efficient and
QoS-Aware Cluster Management. In Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems (2014).
[8] Di, S., Kondo, D., and Cirne, W. Characterization and Comparison of
Cloud versus Grid Workloads. In Proceedings of the 2012 International
Conference on Cluster Computing (2012).
[9] Gong, Z., Gu, X., and Wilkes, J. Press: Predictive Elastic Resource Scal-
ing for Cloud Systems. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Network and Service Management (2010).
[10] Google. TensorFlow Serving. http://tensorflow.github.io/serving/.
[11] He, K., Fisher, A., Wang, L., Gember, A., Akella, A., and Risten-
part, T. Next Stop, the Cloud: Understanding Modern Web Service
Deployment in EC2 and Azure. In Proceedings of the 2013 Internet
Measurement Conference (2013).
[12] Islam, S., Keung, J., Lee, K., and Liu, A. Empirical Prediction Models
for Adaptive Resource Provisioning in the Cloud. Future Generation
Computer Systems 28, 1 (2012).
[13] Jia, Y., Shelhamer, E., Donahue, J., Karayev, S., Long, J., Girshick, R.,
Guadarrama, S., and Darrell, T. Caffe: Convolutional Architecture
for Fast Feature Embedding. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Multimedia (2014).
[14] Khan, A., Yan, X., Tao, S., and Anerousis, N. Workload Characteri-
zation and Prediction in the Cloud: A Multiple Time Series Approach.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Network and Service
Management (2012).
[15] Kilcioglu, C., Rao, J., Kannan, A., and McAfee, R. P. Usage Patterns
and the Economics of the Public Cloud. In Proceedings of the 26th
International World Wide Web Conference (2017).
[16] Li, A., Yang, X., Kandula, S., and Zhang, M. CloudCmp: Comparing
Public Cloud Providers. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGCOMM
Conference on Internet Measurement (2010).
[17] Lo, D., Cheng, L., Govindaraju, R., Ranganathan, P., and
Kozyrakis, C. Heracles: Improving Resource Efficiency at Scale. In
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (2015).
[18] Meng, X., Bradley, J., Yavuz, B., Sparks, E., Venkataraman, S., Liu,
D., Freeman, J., Tsai, D., Amde, M., Owen, S., et al. MLLib: Machine
Learning in Apache Spark. Journal of Machine Learning Research 17,
34 (2016).
[19] Mishra, A. K., Hellerstein, J. L., Cirne, W., and Das, C. R. Towards
Characterizing Cloud Backend Workloads: Insights from Google Com-
pute Clusters. SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. 37, 4 (Mar. 2010).
[20] Novakovic, D., Vasic, N., Novakovic, S., Kostic, D., and Bianchini,
R. DeepDive: Transparently Identifying and Managing Performance
Interference in Virtualized Environments. In Proceedings of the USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (2013).
[21] Padala, P., Hou, K.-Y., Shin, K. G., Zhu, X., Uysal, M., Wang, Z.,
Singhal, S., and Merchant, A.
Automated Control of Multiple
Virtualized Resources. In Proceedings of the 4th European Conference
on Computer systems (2009).
[22] Reiss, C., Tumanov, A., Ganger, G. R., Katz, R. H., and Kozuch,
M. A. Heterogeneity and Dynamicity of Clouds at Scale: Google Trace
Analysis. In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Cloud Computing
(2012).
[23] Roy, N., Dubey, A., and Gokhale, A. Efficient Autoscaling in the Cloud
Using Predictive Models for Workload Forecasting. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Cloud Computing (2011).
[24] Verma, A., Ahuja, P., and Neogi, A. pMapper: Power and Migration
Cost Aware Application Placement in Virtualized Systems. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Distributed Systems Platforms
and Open Distributed Processing (2008).
[25] Wilkes, J.
More Google Cluster Data.
Google research blog,
Nov. 2011.
Posted at http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2011/11/
more-google-cluster-data.html.
[26] Wu, Q., Deng, Q., Ganesh, L., Hsu, C.-H., Jin, Y., Kumar, S., Li, B.,
Meza, J., and Song, Y. J. Dynamo: Facebook’s Data Center-Wide Power
Management System. In Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (2016).
[27] Yang, H., Breslow, A., Mars, J., and Tang, L. Bubble-flux: Precise
Online QoS Management for Increased Utilization in Warehouse Scale
Computers. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (2013).
