 
A Performance Study on the VM Startup Time in the Cloud 
 
Ming Mao 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Virginia 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
ming@cs.virginia.edu 
Marty Humphrey 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Virginia 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
humphrey@cs.virginia.edu
 
 
Abstract—One of many advantages of the cloud is the elasticity, 
the ability to dynamically acquire or release computing 
resources in response to demand. However, this elasticity is 
only meaningful to the cloud users when the acquired Virtual 
Machines (VMs) can be provisioned in time and be ready to 
use within the user expectation. The long unexpected VM 
startup time could result in resource under-provisioning, 
which will inevitably hurt the application performance. A 
better understanding of the VM startup time is therefore 
needed to help cloud users to plan ahead and make in-time 
resource provisioning decisions. In this paper, we study the 
startup time of cloud VMs across three real-world cloud 
providers – Amazon EC2, Windows Azure and Rackspace. We 
analyze the relationship between the VM startup time and 
different factors, such as time of the day, OS image size, 
instance type, data center location and the number of instances 
acquired at the same time. We also study the VM startup time 
of spot instances in EC2, which show a longer waiting time and 
greater variance compared to on-demand instances. 
Keywords-cloud computing; VM startup/acquisition/spinup 
time; performance study; spot instances; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One great advantage of the cloud is the elasticity, the 
ability to dynamically provision resources in response to 
demand. 
Based 
on 
the 
workload 
information 
and 
performance requirements, the users can acquire more cloud 
VMs to handle workload surges, or release cloud VMs to 
avoid 
resource 
over-provisioning. 
This 
on-demand 
scalability feature has attracted many people to join the cloud 
community to help them handle the dynamical workload and 
reduce their cost. However, one important fact in this 
dynamic process is that though cloud users can make their 
acquisition requests at any time, it may take some time for 
the acquired VMs to be ready to use. Cloud providers need 
time to find a spot to provision the VM in their data centers, 
to allocate resources (e.g. IP addresses) to the VM and to 
copy/boot/configure the OS image. We call this time period 
the VM startup time. Cloud users have been aware of this 
delayed resource availability issue and complained about the 
unexpected long waiting time [1][2]. It slows down their 
development progress, and more importantly, hurts the 
performance of their cloud applications. The advantages of 
the cloud are greatly discounted in such cases. The research 
community has started to work on this problem and proposed 
several techniques to speed up the VM provisioning process 
[3][4][5][6]. In this paper, we perform a systematic study on 
the cloud VM startup time across three cloud providers – 
Amazon EC2, Windows Azure and Rackspace (or simply 
EC2, Azure and Rackspace).  We report the numbers and 
facts, analyze the relationship between the VM startup time 
and different factors, compare the three cloud providers and 
make recommendations whenever possible. 
This performance study is important. Understanding the 
VM startup time will help cloud users to plan ahead and 
make 
better 
resource 
provisioning 
decisions. 
This 
information is particularly important to the time-critical 
applications that rely on the cloud’s on-demand resources 
and is crucial to the cloud auto-scaling mechanisms to make 
correct decisions [7][8].  As pointed out by the work “Time 
is money, the value of on-demand [9]”, understanding the 
VM startup time also helps to determine the requirements of 
the resource usage forecasts. If the demand cannot be 
forecasted accurately further out than the VM startup time, 
the value of on-demand diminishes. Currently, we do not see 
any complete study on the VM startup time in the cloud. [10] 
covers five instance types for single- and multiple-instance 
requests in EC2. [11] covers the WebRole and WorkerRole 
when Windows Azure is in the community technology 
preview phase. In both works, they do not consider factors 
like time of the day, OS image size, instance type and data 
center location, which will affect the VM startup time as well. 
They do not cover the newly published services like spot 
instances and VMRole. Since these studies are performed 
two years ago, it is also interesting to see whether there is 
any improvement on the VM startup time in the past two 
years. In this paper, the measurement of the VM startup time 
is not relied on the status tags provided by the cloud 
providers, which are sometimes confusing and imprecise. 
For example, a “running” instance does not necessarily mean 
the acquired VM is ready to use. It could be still in the OS 
downloading phase. Instead, we use the duration from the 
time of issuing VM acquisition requests to the time that the 
acquired instances can be logged in remotely as the VM 
startup time. This is a more precise and direct measurement 
than the status tags.  
In addition to reporting the numbers and facts collected 
in the experiments, we try to analyze the data, extract useful 
information and compare the cloud providers whenever 
possible. Here are the highlights of our findings. 
2012 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing
978-0-7695-4755-8/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CLOUD.2012.103
423
2012 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing
978-0-7695-4755-8/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CLOUD.2012.103
423

 
x 
Within each cloud provider, the VM startup time of both 
Linux and Windows machines are independent of time 
of the day.  
x 
In EC2 and Rackspace, Windows instances take around 
9 times longer than Linux instances. In Azure, all three 
Role instances show similar performances.  
x 
The size of the OS image can largely affect the VM 
startup time. For all three cloud providers, the VM 
startup time increases linearly as the image size increases.   
x 
The VM startup time is also affected by the instance 
type. In Azure and Rackspace, the VM startup time goes 
longer as the instance type goes larger. However, this is 
not the case in EC2. 
x 
Within each cloud provider, the VM startup time does 
not show significant differences across different data 
center locations. One exception is that in EC2, the newly 
established data center shows a slower VM startup time 
(20%) and greater variance than the existing data centers. 
x 
In EC2, the VM startup time is relatively constant across 
all instances when requesting a pool of VMs to start. 
However, in our experiments, we frequently observed 
that this was not the case in Windows Azure, as the last 
VM instance to come on-line sometimes took 
significantly longer than the first instance. 
x 
For all the factors, spot instances show a longer VM 
startup time and greater variance compared to the on-
demand instances. There’s a significantly longer waiting 
time for the cloud provider to serve a spot instance 
request, while the actual VM provisioning and booting 
time are consistent with on-demand instances. Moreover, 
we do not see a significant correlation between the VM 
startup time and the real-time spot price.  
x 
Instance acquisition requests are not always successfully 
served by the cloud providers. In our experiments, 
Rackspace had a higher failure rate (8%) than EC2 
(0.8%) and Azure (0.4%). 
x 
The VM release time is not affected by the OS image 
size, instance type or data center location. 
x 
Compared to the related studies conducted two years 
ago, Azure shows a 200-second improvement and 
smaller variance on the VM startup time, while EC2’s 
performance does not change. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the three cloud providers we have chosen and the 
experiment setup process. Section III details and analyzes the 
experiment results based on different factors, such as time, 
data center location, instance type, etc. Section IV discusses 
the related work. Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss 
the future work in Section V. 
II. 
CLOUD PROVIDERS & EXPERIMENT SETUP 
In this performance study, we choose three cloud 
providers as our experiment subjects. They are Amazon 
EC2[12], Windows Azure[13], and Rackspace[14]. We 
choose these three cloud providers because they are popular 
and have been continuously ranked as the top 10 cloud 
providers [15][16]. EC2 and Rackspace are well-known 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) cloud providers. They can 
provision VMs with different hardware configurations based 
on the user requests. Azure is a well-known Platform-as-a-
Service (PasS) cloud provider. Initially, Azure offers 
WebRole and WorkerRole for hosting front-end web 
applications and processing backend tasks. Recently it allows 
users to deploy a Windows image prepared offline called 
VMRole in the cloud, in which cloud users can control the 
whole software stack and log in remotely. This is essentially 
an IaaS type of service. And not like other PasS cloud 
providers, even for their WebRole and WorkerRole services, 
Azure has offered APIs and enabled remote desktop 
connections to talk to the hosting operating system, which 
functions more like a VM. For all the roles, users can choose 
appropriate instance types and monitor the life-cycles of the 
acquired instances. Because of these practical considerations, 
we include Azure in this study.   
In this study, we will examine the VM startup time based 
on different factors. These factors include time of the day, 
OS image size, instance type, data center location and the 
number of the instances requested at the same time. In each 
experiment, we use the following default parameters in 
TABLE I. Currently, EC2 offers twelve instance types, 
Azure offers five instance types and Rackspace offers seven 
instance types. The default instance types are m1.small, 
Small and Type IV for each cloud provider, these three 
instance types have similar but not exactly the same 
computing power.  OS images include both Linux and 
Windows for EC2 and Rackspace. For Azure, the default 
WebRole and WorkerRole applications are the template 
applications included in the Azure SDK. The default OS 
image for VMRole is plain Windows Server 2008R2 without 
any user application installed. For high availability and small 
communication latency, cloud providers currently have 
globally distributed data centers to host user VM instances. 
By default, our experiments are conducted in the availability 
zone 1 of the US East region for EC2 and South Central US 
for Azure. Rackspace currently does not support the VM 
location options.  
TABLE I.  
DEFAULT VM TYPE, OS & LOCATION 
Type 
OS Image 
Location 
Amazon EC2 
m1.small 
Linux(Fedora)  ami-48aa4921  
us-east-1a 
m1.small 
Windows  (Win Server 2008) 
ami-fbf93092  
us-east-1a 
Windows Azure 
Small 
WebRole 
default WebRole app in Azure SDK 
South 
Central US 
Small 
WorkerRole 
default WorkerRole app in Azure SDK 
South 
Central US 
Small 
VMRole 
Win Server 2008R2 
South 
Central US 
Rackspace 
Type IV 
Linux (Fedora)   flavor 71  
N/A 
Type IV 
Windows (Win Server 2008R2) flavor 28  N/A 
 
To describe the life-cycles of the cloud VM instances, 
cloud providers use a set of status tags to indicate the states 
of the acquired VM instances. The state transition of a VM 
instance from acquisition to release is summarized in Figure 
424
424

 
1. Clearly, cloud providers define different phases/states for 
their VM instances. Moreover, the meanings of the states are 
sometimes confusing. For example, a “running” instance 
does not necessarily mean that the instance is ready to use. 
The instance could still be downloading the OS image or in 
the booting process. To make the definition of the startup 
time consistent across the three cloud providers and provide 
a more precise measurement, in our experiment, we ignore 
the status tags. Instead, we use the duration from the time of 
issuing VM acquisition requests to the time that the acquired 
instances can be logged in remotely as the VM startup time. 
For Linux, we use the first successful ssh login time. For 
Windows, we use the first successful remote-desktop 
connection time. For Azure WebRole and WorkerRole, we 
use the first successful http request time served by the 
WebRole instances and the first logging time by the 
WorkerRole instances as the VM startup time. The detailed 
definition can be found in TABLE II.  
 
Pending
Running
Shutting-
down
Terminated
StoppedVM
CreatingVM
StartingVM
BusyRole
ReadyRole
StoppingRole
StoppingVM
StoppedVM
Building
Post-
configuration
Active
Delete
 
Figure 1.  The state transition of Cloud VMs. 
TABLE II.  
DEFINITION OF VM STARTUP TIME 
VM 
Definition of VM startup time 
Linux VMs 
The first successful ssh login 
Windows VMs 
The first successful remote desktop connection 
WebRoles 
The first successful http request 
WorkerRoles 
The first successful logging 
 
This performance study is conducted from Oct 15th, 2011 
to Feb 15th, 2012, totally a four-month period. We write a 
client to collect VM startup information from the three cloud 
providers. The client runs on one machine of the eScience 
group at CS department, UVa and periodically sends POST 
requests to create VM instances using the cloud provider API.  
III. 
EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
A. By Time 
Our first experiment is to measure the relationship 
between the cloud VM startup time and time of the day. We 
show both the quantiles and the average of the VM startup 
time for Linux and Windows machines in the three figures 
below. For all three cloud providers, the VM startup time is 
independent of time of the day. We do that see any clear 
patterns.  This may imply that the VM startup time is 
unlikely affected by the business open or close hours. For 
both EC2 and Rackspace, it is around 9 times faster to 
acquire Linux machines than Windows machines. The main 
reason is that Windows image is much larger than the Linux 
image and the data transfer time dominates the VM startup 
time. The effects of OS image size on the VM startup time 
will be explained in more details in the next experiment. For 
Azure, we see that WebRole, WorkerRole and VMRole 
instances show very similar startup performance. Therefore, 
we show both the quantiles and the average for WebRole 
instances, but only the average for WorkerRole and VMRole 
instances. On average, the VM startup time of WebRole 
instances is 20 seconds shorter than the VMRole instances, 
but 30 seconds longer than the WorkerRole instances. 
VMRole takes the shortest time to startup since it is a plain 
Windows image without any other software/service installed 
(e.g. no IIS as in WebRole). The results also show that Azure 
has a 200 second improvement and smaller variance on the 
VM startup time than two years ago [11]. 
TABLE III.  
AVERAGE VM STARTUP TIME 
Cloud 
OS  
Average VM startup time 
EC2 
Linux 
96.9 seconds 
EC2 
Windows   
810.2 seconds 
Azure 
WebRole 
374.8 seconds 
Azure 
WorkerRole 
406.2 seconds 
Azure 
VMRole 
356.6 seconds 
Rackspace 
Linux 
44.2 seconds 
Rackspace 
Windows 
429.2 seconds 
 
 
Figure 2.  EC2 VM startup time – by time of the day. 
 
Figure 3.  Azure VM startup time – by time of the day. 
 
Figure 4.  Rackspace VM startup time – by time of the day. 
425
425

 
B. By OS Image Size 
In this experiment, we measure the VM startup time by 
different OS image sizes in the cloud. For EC2 and 
Rackspace, we use the default Linux OS image as the base 
image, add more files under the root directory and then save 
it as a larger OS image. The four images are 512M, 1G, 2G 
and 4G by size. For Azure WebRole, we add more files to 
the default WebRole application. Because the maximum size 
of an Azure application package is 600M, the four 
applications used in this experiment are 4M, 32M, 256M and 
512M. The VM startup time is shown in Figure 5. Figure 6. 
and Figure 7. For all three cloud providers, the VM startup 
time increases linearly as the image size increases. This 
result partly explains why the VM startup for Windows 
machines is much longer than the Linux machines (there are 
booting time differences as well). Moreover, this result can 
also be used to calculate the internal data transfer rate 
between the VM instances and the image store for each 
cloud provider. The result is shown in TABLE IV. 
Rackspace now has the fastest OS image downloading speed 
(22.5 MB/s). The data transfer rates for EC2 and Rackspace 
are consistent with their cloud storage performances in other 
studies [17][14]. However, Azure shows an order of 
magnitude slower performance compared to EC2 and 
Rackspace, which is also inconsistent with the data transfer 
rate of its blob storage. Currently, we do not have an 
explanation for this fact. In practice, VM image size is one of 
the few factors that can be controlled by the cloud users and 
it can largely affect the speed of the VM startup process as 
shown in this experiment. Thus, carefully planning the 
software stack installed on the OS image and removing 
unnecessary files is a way to keep the image small and speed 
up the VM acquisition process. Sometimes, it is a tradeoff 
decision that needs to be made between the VM startup time 
and the first-time service loading delay. 
TABLE IV.  
 DATA TRANSFER RATE BETWEEN VMS & IMAGE STORE 
Cloud 
Average Data Transfer Rate 
between VM and Image Store 
EC2 
10.9 MB/s 
Azure 
1.1MB/s 
Rackspace 
22.5 MB/s 
 
Figure 5.  EC2 VM startup time – by image size. 
 
Figure 6.  Azure VM startup time – by image size. 
 
Figure 7.  Rackspace VM startup time – by image size. 
C. By VM Instance Type 
The third experiment focuses on the relationship between 
the VM startup time and the VM instance type. Currently, 
cloud providers offer different instance types to meet user 
computing needs. For example, EC2 offers twelve types of 
instances, Azure offers five types of instances and Rackspace 
offers seven types of instances. We summarize the instance 
types that are included in this experiment in the table below.  
TABLE V.  
VM TYPES FOR EC2, AZURE & RACKSPACE 
Type 
CPU 
Mem 
Disk 
Amazon EC2 (1 CU = 1.0-1.2 GHz 2007 Opteron) 
t1.micro 
up to 2 CU 
613 MB 
EBS 
m1.small 
1 CU 
1.7 GB 
160 GB 
m1.large 
4 CU 
7.5 GB 
850 GB 
m1.xlarge 
8 CU 
15 GB 
1690 GB 
m2.xlarge 
6.5 CU 
17.1 GB 
420 GB 
c1.medium 
5 CU 
1.7 GB 
350 GB 
Windows Azure 
ExtraSmall 
1.0 GHz 
768 MB 
20 GB 
Small 
1.6 GHz 
1.75 GB 
225 GB 
Medium 
2*1.6 GHz 
3.5 GB 
490 GB 
Large 
4*1.6 GHz 
7 GB 
1000 GB 
ExtraLarge 
8*1.6 GHz 
14 GB 
2040 GB 
Rackspace 
Type I 
N/A 
256 MB 
10 GB 
Type II 
N/A 
512 MB 
20 GB 
Type III 
N/A 
1024 MB 
40 GB 
Type IV 
N/A 
2048 MB 
80 GB 
Type V 
N/A 
4096 MB 
160 GB 
Type VI 
N/A 
8192 MB 
320 GB 
Type VII 
N/A 
15872 MB 
620 GB 
From Figure 8. we do not see any clear patterns based on 
the instance types in EC2. A larger instance type does not 
necessarily imply a longer VM startup time. For example, for 
426
426

 
m1.small, m1.large and m1.xlarge, all of their VM startup 
time are around 100 seconds. However, Azure and 
Rackspace clearly show that the VM startup time increases 
as the instance type goes larger. A notable difference is that 
in Azure and Rackspace, the configuration of next larger 
instance type is always twice more powerful (faster or larger) 
than the previous instance type, which may take longer to 
allocate the resources in the cloud. In EC2, this is not the 
case. This could explain why EC2 does not show the linearly 
(roughly) increasing VM startup time as Azure and Rackspace. 
 
Figure 8.  EC2 VM startup time – by instance type. 
 
Figure 9.  Azure VM startup time – by instance type. 
 
Figure 10.  Rackspace VM startup time – by instance type. 
D. By VM Location 
In this experiment, we collect the cloud VM startup time 
by different locations. For high service availability and to 
reduce the communication latency of geographically 
distributed cloud users, cloud providers offer several 
locations to provision user requested VM instances. TABLE 
VI. summarizes the data center locations of EC2 and Azure. 
Currently, Rackspace does not support the VM-location 
option and we do not include Rackspace in this experiment. 
Figure 11. shows the VM startup time for m1.small instances 
across different data centers in EC2. In fact, during our 
experiment, EC2 announced two new regions. They are the 
US West region in Oregon on 9th Nov, 2011 and the South 
America region in Sao Paulo on 15th Dec, 2011. Considering 
the number of data points we can collect, we include the 
Oregon data center but not the Sao Paulo data center in this 
experiment.   All data centers show similar performances (98 
seconds) except that the newly established data center shows 
slightly slower VM startup time (120 seconds) and greater 
variance. This result contradicts the impression that a newly 
established data center may have lower workload and 
therefore shorter VM startup time than the existing data 
centers. Figure 12.  shows the VM startup time for small 
WebRole applications in Azure. Azure also shows similar 
performances across different data center locations. 
Therefore, we conclude that currently the location is not a 
significant factor contributing to the duration of the VM 
startup process in the cloud. However, users need to consider 
the longer VM startup time in newly estalished data centers. 
TABLE VI.  
VM LOCATIONS FOR EC2 & AZURE 
Regions 
Location 
Amazon EC2 
US East (us-east-1a,1b,1d) 
Virginia, US 
US West (us-west-1a,1b,1c) 
California, US 
US West* (us-west-2a,2b) 
Oregon, US 
EU West (eu-west-1a,1b,1c) 
Ireland, EU 
Asia Pacific (ap-southwest-1a,1b) 
Singapore 
Asia Pacific (ap-northeast-1a,1b) 
Tokyo, Japan 
Windows Azure 
North-central US 
Chicago, IL 
South-central US 
San Antonio, TX 
East Asia 
Hong Kong, China 
South East Asia 
Singapore 
West Europe 
Amsterdam, Netherland 
North Europe 
Dublin, Ireland 
*announced on 9th Nov, 2011 
 
 
Figure 11.  EC2 VM startup time – by location. 
 
Figure 12.  Azure VM startup time – by location. 
427
427

 
E. Multiple Instances 
The above results show the VM startup time for a single-
instance request in the cloud. In this experiment, we will 
show the VM startup time for a multiple-instance acquisition 
request. By default, EC2 allows cloud users to run 20 on-
demand instances per region [12]. Azure allows 20 VM 
cores per account [13]. Currently, Rackspace only allows 
users to acquire one VM instance per request [18]. In other 
words, cloud users have to repeat the single-instance request 
for multiple times if they need more than one instance. 
Therefore, we study the VM startup time of a 16-instance 
request only for EC2 and Azure. The results are shown in 
Figure 13. and Figure 14. For EC2, we do not see the VM 
startup time increases as the number of acquired instances 
increases. All instances have the VM startup time around 
100 seconds. However the variance becomes greater 
compared to single-instance requests. In Azure, the startup 
time increases linearly as the number of instance increases. 
For a 16-instance acquisition request, the average VM 
startup time of the 16th instance is 110 seconds slower than 
the 1st instance (from 395 sec to 505 sec). In other words, 
when a large number of instances are acquired at the same 
time, the amortized average VM startup time becomes longer. 
Therefore, users need a longer preparation time than single-
instance requests. Also note that the last several VMs have 
greater variance compared to the early instances. 
 
 
Figure 13.  EC2 VM startup time – by multiple instances. 
 
Figure 14.  Azure VM startup time – by multiple instances. 
F. Spot Instances 
Finally, we collect the VM startup time for spot instances 
(SI). Currently, EC2 offers spot instances to allow users to 
bid for their unused capacity and run those instances for as 
long as their bid exceeds the current spot price. The spot 
price changes periodically based on supply and demand, and 
customers whose bids exceed it gain access to the available 
spot instances. Spot instances have different life-cycle 
statuses compared to the on-demand instances (ODI). Instead 
of the “pending” status, they now have “open” and “active”. 
“Open” means the spot instance request is waiting to be 
served, while “active” means the acquired VM is being 
provisioned, which is just like the “pending” status for the 
on-demand instances. Based on our experiment results, we 
can see the “open to active” phase is the most time 
consuming part in the acquisition process of spot instances. 
In other words, spot instance requests take significantly 
longer time waiting to be served than the on-demand 
instances. In this section, we report both the quantiles and the 
average for the spot instances to be active (ActiveQuantile 
and ActiveMean in the figures) and only the average for the 
whole VM startup process (VM Startup Mean). For both spot 
and on-demand instances, the time from being provisioned 
(active or pending) to the first successful login is consistent. 
It is around 95 seconds for m1.small instances. This 
consistency also holds for different instance types and data 
center locations. 
 Time of the day (Figure 15. ) – Similar to ODI, SI does 
not show any clear pattern based on time of the day. 
However, the average VM startup time has been increased to 
519 seconds, in which 423 seconds are spent in waiting for 
the requests to be served. SI also shows greater variance 
compared to ODI. Instance type (Figure 16. ) – Similar to 
ODI, the VM startup time of SI does not show significant 
differences based on the instance type. One notable 
difference is that t1.micro now has similar startup time to 
other larger instance types. Location (Figure 17. ) – The VM 
startup time of SI shows greater differences based on the 
locations. The US East region (us-east-1a, b, d) has longer (2 
or 3 times) VM startup time than the other locations. We 
believe this change implies the levels of the SI workload in 
different regions. This fact means that cloud users can 
choose faster locations to launch their spot instances to 
reduce the waiting time by 7 minutes. Multiple instances 
(Figure 18. ) – SI also scales well with multiple instances. 
The “active” difference between the 16th and the 1st instances 
is within 23 seconds, while the real VM provisioning time is 
consistent across all the 16 instances, which is around 96.9 
seconds. Real-time price (Figure 19. ) – The VM startup 
time of SI does not show a significant correlation with the 
spot prices. A higher spot price does not necessarily imply a 
longer VM startup time. For all the seven real-time prices we 
observed, the differences of the VM startup time are within 
96 seconds. 
 
 
Figure 15.  EC2 VM startup time (SI) – by time. 
428
428

 
 
Figure 16.  EC2 VM startup time (SI) – by instance type. 
 
Figure 17.  EC2 VM startup time (SI) – by location. 
 
Figure 18.  EC2 VM startup time (SI) – by multiple instances. 
 
Figure 19.  EC2 VM startup time (SI) – by price. 
G. Other Facts 
In this section, we report some other facts that can affect 
the VM acquisition decisions. Particularly, we will talk about 
(1) the prices of spot instances, (2) the success rate of the 
instance acquisition requests and (3) the average time to 
release a cloud VM instance. 
The original idea of spot instances is that EC2 can offer 
cloud users unused capacity to improve their resource 
utilization and cloud users could purchase computing 
resources at a lower price to reduce cost. From the economic 
point of view, spot instances should be cheaper than on-
demand instances because their life-cycles are not fully 
controlled by the cloud users and they take longer time to 
startup. However, we find this is not always the case. Figure 
20. shows the percentage that the prices of SI stay below, 
stay the same and go above the ODI in our experiment 
period. For t1.micro instances, there is 53% of the time that 
spot prices are higher than or equal to the on-demand 
instances. For other instance types, this percentage is 
between 3% and 21%. This fact means that even if users bid 
SI with on-demand prices, the VMs may still be not available. 
The VM startup time is then dependent on the movement of 
spot price. One possible solution is that users can actually 
bid a higher price than ODI, but make sure the average cost 
in the long run is still cheaper than ODI. In this case, users 
sacrifice some money for shorter (more certain) VM startup 
time and reduce the possibility of instance shut-downs by EC2. 
 
 
Figure 20.  Price distribution of spot instances 
VM acquisition requests are not always successfully 
served by the cloud providers. Sometimes, the acquired 
instances could go to error states. For example, the OS 
cannot be booted or the instances cannot be connected. We 
report the success rate of the instance acquisition requests in 
TABLE VII.  Both EC2 and Azure have a success rate above 
99%, however, Rackspace only shows a 92% success rate. 
This fact means that, users need to check the VM status after 
each instance acquisition request.  When unhealthy instances 
are provisioned, it means the acquired VMs will take forever 
to startup. Cloud users need to manually delete the resource 
and reacquire the instances. This is one factor in the VM 
startup process that cannot be controlled by the users. 
In addition to studying the VM acquisition time, we also 
record the VM release time. The VM release time is much 
shorter and more stable than the VM acquisition time. We 
don’t see any significant differences by different factors. 
Therefore, we only report the average VM release time for 
each cloud provider. In the table below, we use the duration 
from the time of issuing the instance deletion requests to the 
time that the VMs cannot be successfully pinged as the VM 
release time. Azure shows a slightly longer VM release time 
than EC2 and Rackspace.  
TABLE VII.  
THE ACQUISITION SUCCESS RATE & VM RELEASE TIME 
Cloud 
Success Rate 
VM Release Time 
EC2 
99.2% 
3-8 seconds 
Azure 
99.6% 
8-21 seconds 
Rackspace
92.0% 
3-8 seconds 
429
429

 
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
Though the performance of the VM startup process has 
been mentioned in several research papers, they just served 
as part of the work to evaluate the overall performance for a 
cloud provider. To the best of our knowledge, there has not 
been any complete and systematic performance study on the 
VM startup time based on related factors as we did in this 
paper. For example, in [10], the authors compared the VM 
startup time between single- and multiple-instance requests 
in EC2. [11] analyzed the startup time for WebRole and 
WorkRole in Azure. Neither of them considers the factors 
like time of the day, OS image size, instance type and data 
center locations. They do not consider the newly published 
services such as spot instances and VMRole as well. From 
these studies conducted two years ago, we can see Azure 
shows a 200 second improvement and smaller variance on 
the VM startup time while EC2’s performance does not change. 
People are aware of this waiting time of the dynamically 
provisioned resources in the cloud and have developed 
techniques to speed up the VM provisioning process. For 
example, [19] designed a fast cloud deployment framework 
based on VM cloning. [20] developed a fast start technique 
by restoring previously created VM snapshots of fully 
initialized application. [21] designed a VM image format 
called FVD to support instant VM creation and migration.  
[22] proposed a chuck-level virtual machine image 
distribution network to enable collaborative sharing in cloud 
data centers and reduce the VM instance provisioning time. 
In addition, researchers are particularly interested in 
using spot instances to lower their job execution cost and 
accelerate job execution speed [3][4][5][6]. Their works are 
based on the assumptions that spot instances are cheaper than 
on-demand instances. Therefore, cloud users can acquire 
more computing power using the same amount of money or 
save more money for the same amount of workload than on-
demand instances. However they do not explicitly consider 
the longer VM startup time and the higher prices of spot 
instances in their models. The spot instances may not always 
be a better candidate than the on-demand instances.   
V. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
One of many advantages of cloud computing is elasticity, 
the ability to scale up and down in response to demand 
dynamically. Understanding the VM startup time is 
important for time-critical applications and cloud auto-
scaling mechanisms. In this paper, we analyzed the 
relationship between the VM startup time and different 
factors, extract useful information, compare the performance 
across three cloud providers and make recommendations 
whenever possible. In the future, we plan to extend this 
performance study to more cloud providers and instance 
types, and publish the updated performance results 
periodically. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Are Long VM Instance Spin-Up Times In The Cloud Costing You 
Money? 
http://highscalability.com/blog/2011/3/17/are-long-vm-
instance-spin-up-times-in-the-cloud-costing-you.html 
[2] Why does Azure deployment take so long? http://stackoverflow.com 
/questions/5080445/why-does-azure-deployment-take-so-long 
[3] S. Yi, D. Kondo, and A. Andrzejak, “Reducing Costs of Spot 
Instances via Checkpointing in the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud,” 
In The 3rd IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing 
(CLOUD 2010), Miami, FL USA, 2010. 
[4] S. Wee, "Debunking Real-Time Pricing in Cloud Computing,” In The 
11th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and 
Grid Computing (CCGrid 2011), Newport Beach, CA, USA, 2011. 
[5] N. Chohan, C. Castillo, M. Spreitzer, M. Steinder, A. Tantawi, and C. 
Krintz. “See Spot Run: Using Spot Instances for Mapreduce 
Workows,” In Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX conference on Hot 
topics in cloud computing (HotCloud 2010), pages 7-7, Berkeley, 
CA, USA, 2010. 
[6] M. Mattess, C. Vecchiola, and R. Buyya, “Managing Peak Loads by 
Leasing Cloud Infrastructure Services from a Spot Market,” In 
Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 12th International Conference on High 
Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC 2010), pages 
180-188, Washington, DC, USA, 2010. 
[7] M. Mao, Jie Li and M. Humphrey, “Cloud Auto-Scaling with 
Deadline and Budget Constraints,” In Proceedings of 11th 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Grid Computing (Grid 
2010), Brussels, Belgium, Oct 25-28, 2010. 
[8] M. Mao and M. Humphrey, “Auto-Scaling to Minimize Cost and 
Meet Application Deadlines in Cloud Workflows,” In Proceedings of 
2011 International Conference for High Performance Computing, 
Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC 2011), Seattle, WA,  Nov 15-
20, 2011. 
[9] Joe Weinman, Time is Money: The Value of “On-Demand”, 
http://www.joeweinman.com/Resources/Joe_Weinman_Time_Is_Mo
ney.pdf 
[10] S. Ostermann, A. Iosup, N. Yigitbasi, R. Prodan, T. Fahringer and D. 
Epema, “A Performance Analysis of EC2 Cloud Computing Services 
for Scientific Computing,” CloudComp 2009. 
[11] Z. Hill, M. Mao, J. Li, A. Ruiz-Alvarez, and M. Humphrey, "Early 
Observations on the Performance of Windows Azure," in 1st 
Workshop on Scientific Cloud Computing (ScienceCloud 2010), 
2010. 
[12] Amazon EC2. http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/ 
[13] Windows Azure. http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/ 
[14] Rackspace. http://www.rackspace.com/ 
[15] HostMonk, 
All 
Rankings 
of 
Cloud 
Providers. 
http://www.hostmonk.com/ranks/cloud 
[16] SearchCloudComputing. Top 10 Cloud Computing Providers of 2011. 
http://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/feature/Top-10-cloud-
computing-providers-of-2011 
[17] EC2 Data Transfer Rate. http://blog.rightscale.com/2007/10/28 
/network-performance-within-amazon-ec2-and-to-amazon-s3/ 
[18] Rackspace Cloud Server Limits. http://docs.rackspace.com 
/servers/api/v1.0/cs-devguide/content/Limits-d1e997.html 
[19] X. Wu, Z. Shen, R. W and Y. Lin, “Jump-start cloud: efficient 
deployment framework for large-scale cloud applications,” In 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Distributed 
Computing and Internet Technology (ICDCIT 11). 
[20] J. Zhu, Z. Jiang and Z. Xiao, “Twinkle: A Fast Resource Provisioning 
Mechanism for Internet Services,” In The 30th IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM 2011), 
Shanghai, China 2011. 
[21] C. Tang, “FVD: A High-Performance Virtual Machine Image Format 
For Cloud,” In Proceedings of the 2011 USENIX Conference on 
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIXATC'11). 
[22] C. Peng, M. Kim, Z. Zhang and H. Lei, “VDN: Virtual Machine 
Image Distribution Network for Cloud Data Centers,” In The 31th 
IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications 
(INFOCOM 2012), Orlando, FL USA, 2012. 
 
430
430
